Operator learning for predicting multiscale bubble growth dynamics
Chensen Lin,1 Zhen Li,2 Lu Lu,3 Shengze Cai,1 Martin Maxey,1 and
George Em Karniadakis1, a)
1)

Division of Applied Mathematics, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912,

arXiv:2012.12816v1 [physics.comp-ph] 23 Dec 2020

USA
2)

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634,

USA
3)

Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,

MA 02139, USA
(Dated: 24 December 2020)

1

Simulating and predicting multiscale problems that couple multiple physics and
dynamics across many orders of spatiotemporal scales is a great challenge that has
not been investigated systematically by deep neural networks (DNNs). Herein, we
develop a framework based on operator regression, the so-called deep operator network
(DeepONet), with the long term objective to simplify multiscale modeling by avoiding
the fragile and time-consuming “hand-shaking” interface algorithms for stitching
together heterogeneous descriptions of multiscale phenomena. To this end, as a
first step, we investigate if a DeepONet can learn the dynamics of different scale
regimes, one at the deterministic macroscale and the other at the stochastic microscale
regime with inherent thermal fluctuations. Specifically, we test the effectiveness
and accuracy of DeepONet in predicting multirate bubble growth dynamics, which
is described by a Rayleigh-Plesset (R-P) equation at the macroscale and modeled
as a stochastic nucleation and cavitation process at the microscale by dissipative
particle dynamics (DPD). First, we generate data using the R-P equation for multirate
bubble growth dynamics caused by randomly time-varying liquid pressures drawn from
Gaussian random fields (GRF). Our results show that properly trained DeepONets
can accurately predict the macroscale bubble growth dynamics and can outperform
long short-term memory (LSTM) networks. We also demonstrate that DeepONet
can extrapolate accurately outside the input distribution using only very few new
measurements. Subsequently, we train the DeepONet with DPD data corresponding
to stochastic bubble growth dynamics. Although the DPD data is noisy and we only
collect sparse data points on the trajectories, the trained DeepONet model is able to
predict accurately the mean bubble dynamics for time-varying GRF pressures. Taken
together, our findings demonstrate that DeepONets can be employed to unify the
macroscale and microscale models of the multirate bubble growth problem, hence
providing new insight into the role of operator regression via DNNs in tackling realistic
multiscale problems and in simplifying modeling with heterogeneous descriptions.

a)

Corresponding author. E-mail: george karniadakis@brown.edu

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

Machine learning methods that learn effective physical models from available observational
data have attracted increasing attention in recent years1–3 and have demonstrated success
in diverse application areas4–7 . In particular, the use of deep neural networks (DNNs) as a
surrogate model of complex dynamic systems is a promising approach for exploring hidden
physics from observed data4,5 . Many different DNN architectures have been developed for
targeting different types of scientific problems8,9 . Examples include convolutional neural
networks (CNN) for turbulence modeling10 , recurrent neural networks (RNN) for predictive
flow control11 , and generative adversarial networks (GAN) for super-resolution of fluid flows12 .
In general, different physical quantities involved in the same dynamic process are correlated
either explicitly or implicitly. Using the observational data of one physical quantity to
predict other unobserved quantities requires a model to correctly correlate different physical
quantities, which can be achieved by training a DNN with a lot of observational data13 .
There are two possible scenarios when we develop a DNN model for a physical problem.
First, if we have sufficient physical knowledge on the dynamic process and know its governing
equations, i.e., in the form of partial differential equations (PDEs), it becomes possible to
encode the PDEs into the DNN, which leads to the physics-informed neural network (PINN)
model5 . Second, if we lack physical knowledge of a given physical problem and do not know
the form of its governing equations, we need to learn the governing equations or operators
from available observed data. This motivated Lu et al.3 to develop a deep operator network
(DeepONet) to learn implicitly PDEs from data as well as many other explicit and implicit
diverse operators.
Both PINN and DeepONet models have been successfully applied to mostly single scale
problems, including high-speed flows14 , hidden fluid mechanics4 , and diffusion-reaction
processes3 . However, it is still challenging to apply DNNs to truly multiscale problems
described by different mathematical formulations. The form of governing equations for
various scales could be significantly different even for the same physical problem, which
makes the integration and coupling of heterogeneous physical models in multiscale problems
very difficult. Because the physical models constructed by DeepONet do not have an explicit
form of governing equations, we can possibly develop a unified multiscale framework based
on DeepONet to significantly simplify the multiscale modeling procedure. In the present
3

work, we will investigate this possibility by considering multiscale bubble growth dynamics,
described by the Rayleigh-Plesset (R-P) equation at the continuum scale and modelled as a
stochastic nucleation and cavitation process at the microscale.
Bubbles are present in a wide range of applications, from advanced materials15 to biology
and medicine16 , as either laser-generated or acoustically-driven bubbles17 . The heat transfer
and fluid flow processes associated with liquid-vapor phase change phenomena are among the
most complex transport conditions that are encountered in engineering applications. The
complexities typically arise from the interplay of multiple length and time scales involved in
the process, non-equilibrium effects, and other effects associated with dynamic interfaces.
Nucleation of one phase into another occurs at the atomic scales whereas growth of the nuclei
and their interaction with the system occurs at much longer length and time scales18 . For
example, boiling is a complex nonequilibrium multiscale process, where the physics is linked
from nano to meso to macro scales. For each of these processes, the physics from different
scales have to be seamlessly connected. However, different models are valid or are practical
only within some space and time range, and bridging the gap between models of different
scales has been a challenge for decades.
A simple and fundamental problem to understand bubble dynamics is that of the growth
of a single bubble as the pressure changes in an otherwise quiescent fluid. This problem
has a long history, beginning with the important contributions of Rayleigh19 . In general,
contemporary interest in the problem is motivated largely by the sound produced by bubbles
that undergo a time-dependent change of volume, particularly in the context of cavitation
bubbles that are produced in hydromachinery or in the propulsion systems of submarines
and other underwater vehicles or for biomedical applications. The objective for single-bubble
dynamics is usually to predict the bubble radius as a function of time in a preset ambient
pressure field. Once we know the bubble radius as a function of time, we can determine the
velocity and pressure fields throughout the liquid, and evaluate the sound produced.
In the macroscale regime, the R-P ordinary differential equation (ODE) is a valid model for
the governing dynamics of a spherical bubble in an incompressible fluid. It is derived from the
Navier–Stokes (N-S) equation based on the assumptions of a continuum hypothesis and of a
single spherically symmetric bubble in an infinite domain of liquid at rest far from the bubble
and with uniform temperature far from the bubble. In the microscale and nanoscale regimes,
we can use molecular dynamics (MD) models to investigate the single bubble nucleation
4

problem20 . For longer term development, dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) is a more
efficient coarse-grained MD method that has been used to model complex fluid systems such
as red blood cells21 , polymers22 , droplet23,24 , suspension25 , etc. The equations of DPD are
stochastic differential equations with conservative, dissipative and random forces. A few
studies have reported using DPD to simulate bubble dynamics26,27 . An effective model28
is a hybrid model of DPD and its extension to multi-body dissipative particle dynamics
(MDPD), where the traditional DPD particles are used for gas phase and MDPD particles
for liquid phase. The model is validated by comparing it to the R-P equation for the larger
size bubbles and with MD for the smaller size bubbles.
In this paper, our goal is to test the effectiveness of DeepONet as the surrogate model for
both the macroscale and microscale physics. The paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we describe details of the DeepONet model. In Section 3, we introduce the macroscopic
model (R-P model) for bubble dynamics and evaluate the performance of DeepONet at
the continuum scale. In Section 4, we introduce the microscopic model (DPD model) and
evaluate the performance of DeepONet at the stochastic microscale. Finally, we conclude the
paper in Section 5.

II.

LEARNING OPERATORS VIA DEEPONET
Our work is inspired by the work of Lu et al.3 , who proposed a deep operator network

(DeepONet) to approximate nonlinear continuous operators. The DeepONet architecture
is based on rigorous mathematical theory, namely the universal operator approximation
theorem29 , which has been extended to DNNs.
The architecture of the DeepONet consists of a DNN for encoding the discrete input
function space (branch net) and another DNN for encoding the coordinates of the output
functions (trunk net). In the bubble dynamics application, the input function is the ambient
liquid pressure change deviating from the initial equilibrium state, ∆P , while the output
function is the bubble radius, R(t). There are different ways to represent a function but
here the input to the branch is represented by discrete function values at a sufficient but
finite number of locations, which we call “sensors”. The architecture we used in this study is
shown in Fig. 1. The trunk network takes time t as the input and outputs [a1 , a2 , ..., ap ]T .
The branch network takes [∆p(t1 ), ∆p(t2 ), ..., ∆p(tm )]T as the input and outputs a vector
5

Δp(t1)
Δp(t2)

...

b1

Branch net

Δp(tm)

b2

...
bp

×

a1

Trunk net

a2

..

ap

FIG. 1: Schematic of the DeepONet architecture. The branch network takes the liquid
pressure change at different times (from t1 to tm ) as input and outputs [b1 , b2 , ..., bp ]T . The
trunk network takes time t as input and outputs [a1 , a2 , ..., ap ]T . Then, the two vectors are
P
merged together to give the prediction of bubble radius R(t) = G(∆P )(t) = pk=1 (bk ak ).
Both the branch and trunk are feedforward neural networks (FNNs).

[b1 , b2 , ..., bp ]T . This architecture corresponds to the unstacked DeepONet3 . Then, the two
vectors are merged together to predict the bubble radius: R(t) = G(∆p)(t) = Σpk=1 bk ak .

The loss function we employ is the mean squared error (MSE) between the true
value of R(t) from the R-P equation and the network prediction derived from the input ([∆p(t1 ), ∆p(t2 ), ..., ∆p(tm )], t). DeepONet is a high-level network architecture without
restricting the architectures of its inner trunk and branch networks. Here, we choose
feedforward neural network (FNN) as the architectures of the two sub-networks, which are
implemented in the Python library DeepXDE30 .

For each input function ∆P , DeepONet requires evaluations at the same set of discrete
times. However, DeepONet does not have any constraint on the number or location for the
evaluation of output function R(t). DeepONet provides a continuous estimate of the bubble
radius, R at any arbitrary time. In this study, for the efficient training of the networks, we
choose a fixed number of evaluations for each R(t) but at randomly selected times within
the whole interval; see Fig. 2.
6

Δp(t)
(Input)

R(t)
(Output)

t1

t2

t3

tm

G

t1
t2

t3

tm

FIG. 2: Illustration of the training data for two different trajectories in time. For each input
function ∆p(t), DeepONet requires the evaluations at the same discrete time. However,
DeepONet does not have any constraints on the number or location for the evaluation of the
output function R(t). Hence, the data points for the output function can be very sparse and
randomly spaced.
III.

MACROSCALE (CONTINUUM) REGIME

A.

Rayleigh–Plesset model
The R-P equation31–33 is the classical continuum-level model that describes the change in

radius R(t) of a single gas-vapor bubble in an infinite body of liquid as the far-field pressure
P∞ (t) varies with time t. This ODE for the dynamics of a spherical bubble is based on a
number of assumptions. Although it is limited to the case where a continuum model is valid,
it is a simple yet powerful tool to reveal the effects of the surroundings on bubble response
and it is the starting point for our investigation of operator learning as applied to bubble
dynamics.
The underlying assumptions of the R-P model are that the liquid is at rest far from the
bubble and that the liquid phase is incompressible, with constant density ρL and kinematic
viscosity νL . It is also assumed that the contents of the bubble have negligible inertia, are
homogeneous and that the temperature, TB (t), and pressure, PB (t), within the bubble are
uniform. The configuration is illustrated in Fig. 3. As the bubble expands it generates a
radial potential flow corresponding to a point source at the bubble center. The pressure in
the liquid can be determined from the Navier-Stokes equations together with the balance of
7

Liquid

Far From Bubble
P∞(t), T∞

R(t)
Gas / Vapor
PB(t), TB(t)

Bubble Surface

FIG. 3: Schematic of a spherical bubble in an infinite liquid.
the liquid pressure at the bubble surface with the bubble pressure PB and the surface tension
between the phases, given by the coefficient of surface tension γ. As the liquid responds to
the expanding bubble, the liquid pressure balances the effects of liquid inertia and damping
of the motion by viscosity. The R-P equation can be written as
d2 R 3
PB (t) − P∞ (t)
=R 2 +
ρL
dt
2



dR
dt

2
+

2γ
4νL dR
+
.
R dt
ρL R

(1)

The general R-P model assumes that the bubble contains a mixture of an ideal gas and
liquid vapor. The pressure inside the bubble is then the sum of the partial pressures. The
vapor pressure PV is determined by the temperature within the bubble TB while the pressure
of the gas PG is given by a polytropic gas law,

PB (t) = PV (TB ) + PG0

TB
T∞



R0
R

3k
.

(2)

The coefficient k = 1 corresponds to isothermal conditions, or k = 1.4 for a simple adiabatic
gas. Since the microcopic simulations to be described later are based on a thermostat to
maintain a constant temperature, we will neglect the effects of any temperature difference
between the bubble and the liquid, setting TB = T∞ , and assume isothermal conditions.
With these assumptions the R-P equation becomes,
PV (T∞ ) − P∞ (t) PG0
+
ρL
ρL



R0
R

3

d2 R 3
=R 2 +
dt
2



dR
dt

2
+

4νL dR
2γ
.
+
R dt
ρL R

(3)

The initial conditions imposed here are that the initial microbubble radius is R0 at t = 0
and that the bubble is in static equilibrium, with the gas pressure PG = PG0 and the fluid at
8

a pressure P∞ (0) so that
2γ
.
(4)
R0
Consistent with initial equilibrium, dR/dt|t=0 = 0. Under these conditions the vapor pressure
PG0 = P∞ (0) − PV (T∞ ) +

simply gives a constant offset in the liquid pressure at infinity. So as to reduce the number
of parameters under consideration, the results here are based on P∞ (0) = PV (T∞ ) as might
occur close to the onset of cavitation. We are not trying to model any specific physical set of
conditions but for convenience then the initial gas pressure is given in terms of the surface
tension, PG0 = 2γ/R0 .
(a)

(b)

FIG. 4: Typical solution of the R-P equation as a bubble responds to a rapid negative
change in pressure. (a) Ambient liquid pressure change; (b) Bubble radius (blue) and radius
velocity (pink).
A typical solution for Eq. (3) under these conditions is shown in Fig. 4 with a sharp
change in the pressure P∞ (t), which drops sharply below P∞ (0) to a new constant value. The
pressure drop induces a series of damped oscillations as the bubble first expands rapidly and
then gradually adjusts to a new equilibrium size. In the absence of dissipation by viscosity,
these oscillations would continue indefinitely without attenuation. For small variations in the
liquid pressure P∞ (t) = P∞ (0) + ∆p(t), the response is R(t) = R0 + r(t) and the linearized
form of Eq. (3) is,
∆p(t)
d2 r 4νL dr
1
−
= R0 2 +
+
ρL
dt
R0 dt ρL R0



γ
3PG0 − 2
R0


r.

(5)

Under the present conditions, the last coefficient is equal to 2PG0 or equivalently 4γ/R0 . The
corresponding natural frequency ω0 for undamped oscillations is given by
ω02 = 2
9

PG0
.
ρL R02

(6)

This shows the natural time scale of the bubble response to changing pressure and an
indication of how often the bubble radius normally should be observed. It is also clear that
this time scale is dependent on R0 .
For the training and test data to use with DeepONet, we consider a bubble that is
subject to a sharp low-pressure at time t = 0 and then experiences a random liquid pressure
fluctuation thereafter. The liquid pressure change comprises of two parts: the random
fluctuation generated by Gaussian random fields (GRFs), and the ramp function, given in
terms of a power law, for the initial drop in pressure P∞ (t). We define the liquid pressure
change, ∆P (t), as:

g(t) ∼ GP(µ, σklT (t1 , t2 )),
 
10

 t
0 ≤ t < qT,
qT
s(t) =

1
qT ≤ t ≤ T,

(7)

∆P (t) = g(t)s(t).
The Gaussian covariance kernel klT (t1 , t2 ) = exp(−kt1 − t2 k2 /2l2 T 2 ) has a correlation timescale based on the time-scale parameter lT > 0. T is the time interval, and the dimensionless
parameter l determines the smoothness of the sampled function. We choose l = 0.2 unless
otherwise stated. The value of q indicates the duration of the initial pressure drop, and
we choose q = 0.1 unless otherwise stated. The mean value of the pressure change is
µ = −1500Pa and the standard deviation is σ = 400Pa.
The setup of the problem is summarized in Table I. The parameters are representative
of water as the liquid phase and the surface tension is set for a water-air interface at room
temperature.
TABLE I: Values of parameters in Eq. 3.
Parameter

Physical meaning

Value

ρL

liquid density

1 × 103 kgm−3

νL

viscosity

1 × 10−6 m2 s−1

γ

surface tension

7.2 × 10−2 Nm−1

T

time interval

5 × 10−4 s

R(t0 )

initial radius

1 × 10−5 m

dR(t0 )/dt initial radius velocity

10

0 m/s

Fig. 5 demonstrates some representative data for the liquid pressure change, ∆P (t), and
corresponding bubble radius, R(t). The general features of these solutions are characteristic
of the response of a bubble as it passes through any low-pressure region.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 5: (a) Sample trajectories of liquid pressure change with time (∆P (t)); (b)
Corresponding bubble radius (R(t)) from training dataset. The corresponding data for
∆P (t) and R(t) are presented with the same color.

11

B.

Convergence tests
Here, we investigate how the network size and training dataset affect the convergence of

DeepONet. We apply the Adam optimizer with a small learning rate 5 × 10−4 to train the
DeepONet for 2 × 105 iterations. The rectified linear unit (ReLU) is used for the activation
function. By varying the network width, we observe that there is an optimal width to achieve
the smallest error (depth 2), see Fig. 7(a). We note that increasing the width from 1 to
500 could decrease the error, but the error would increase instead when the width further
increases. We also note that increasing the depth from 1 hidden layer to 10 hidden layers
could decrease the training error (width 100), but the test loss reaches the minimum when
the depth is about 6. To examine the effect of the training dataset size, we choose networks
of width 200 and depth 3 to eliminate the network size effect, and the test errors using
different dataset size are shown in Fig. 6(c). As DeepONet has no constraint on the number
of data points per trajectory, we can get the same number of data points either from more
trajectories with sparser points per trajectory or fewer trajectories with denser points per
trajectory. Fig. 6(c) shows the influence of the number of trajectories and the size of the
dataset. It is reasonable that including more training data points leads to smaller error, and
we can also see that when the number of data points is fixed, the number of trajectories is
usually more important than the density of data points on each trajectory.
Fig. 7 shows some representative results of the best model. The width and depth of the
(a)

(c)

(b)

FIG. 6: Mean square error (MSE) convergence. (a) Training and testing errors versus
network width (both branch and trunk net) (depth 2); (b) Training and testing errors versus
network depth (both branch and trunk net) (width 100); (c) Testing errors versus size of
training data (width 200, depth 3 for both branch and trunk net).
12

network is 200 and 3, respectively, and the number of data points is 1 ×105 (5000 trajectories).
The loss histories of the training and testing are presented in Fig. 7(a); the losses converge to
rather small values. Upon training, the DeepONet can predict the bubble radius at any time
when the input functions are given. The comparison of prediction values against the ground
truth is shown in Fig. 7(b), in which the diagonal line indicates a perfect prediction. The
points are colored based on the neighbor density because the points near the diagonal line
are highly overlapped. Some R(t) trajectories predicted by DeepONet are shown in Fig. 7(c)
along with the ground truth. DeepONet can predict them very accurately, capturing all
the oscillations, decay, and smooth change afterward. We also use the trained DeepONet
to predict an out-of-distribution pressure input signal (not from GRF), which is the typical

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 7: Performance of DeepONet for bubble growth prediction. (a) Loss histories of the
training and testing; (b) Parity plot of DeepONet prediction and ground truth from test
dataset; (c) Sample predicted R(t) trajectories and ground truth from test dataset (from
GRF); (d) Prediction for a pressure field not from GRF, which is a typical solution of R-P
equation discussed in Sec.III. The inset plot is the ambient pressure change.
13

solution of R-P equation discussed in Sec. III, see the results in Fig. 7(d) (the inset subplot
is the pressure field).

C.

Comparison of DeepONet and LSTM
Considering the nature of the present problem where we aim to forecast time series, it is

reasonable to question if any recurrent neural network (RNN) could also be a suitable tool
for forecasting besides DeepONet. RNNs were initially used for language processing models,
due to their ability to memorize long-term dependencies. However, when time lags increase,
gradients of RNNs may vanish through unfolding RNNs into deep FNNs. Due to the gradient
vanishing problem, LSTM34 was proposed with forget units, which were designed to give the
memory cells the ability to choose when to forget certain information, thus determine the
optimal time lags. The LSTM cell contains mainly four parts: input gate, input modulation
gate, forget gate and output gate. The input gate takes a new input point from outside and
processes newly coming data; the input modulation gate takes input from the output of the
LSTM cell in the last iteration; the forget gate decides when to forget the output results
and thus selects the optimal time lag for the input sequence; and the output gate takes all
results calculated and generates output for the LSTM cell. LSTM has been utilized for traffic
flow prediction35 , vessel dynamics prediction36 , human trajectory prediction37 , stock price
prediction38 , etc.
The data used to train and test LSTM are the same as those used for DeepONet. With
ample training data and tuned hyper-parameters, we find that both DeepONet and LSTM
can handle this problem well. DeepONet has a great advantage due to its flexibility in
handling arbitrary training data points. We develop six benchmark cases and plot the
results in Fig. 8. The inset subplots are the input functions. For a fair comparison, the
input functions are the same for LSTM and DeepONet. To train the model, 5000 pairs of
liquid pressure and bubble radius trajectories are provided while the availability of data
points on the radius trajectories is limited. In Fig. 8(a)(d), only 20 data points are known
per trajectory, (b)(e) 80 data points, and (c)(f) 200 data points. Because LSTM requires
that the locations of all data points be aligned, even though LSTM learned well on these
given locations, it does not have any knowledge on locations which are not on a predefined
grid, see Fig. 8(a)(b). The problem can be alleviated when the data points are sufficiently
14

Sparser training data

Denser training data

20 points / trajectory

80 points / trajectory

200 points / trajectory

LSTM

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

DeepONet

FIG. 8: Comparative performance of LSTM and DeepONet on testing data. (a-c)
Predictions of LSTM; (d-f) Predictions of DeepONet. The number of training data points
on each trajectory are (a)(d) 20, (b)(e) 80, (c)(f) 200. The inset subplots show the liquid
pressure trajectory. 5000 training trajectories are provided for all the cases. DeepONet show
great advantage when training data are very sparse.

dense (Fig. 8(c)). On the other hand, as stated in Sec. II, DeepONet does not enforce any
constraint on the number or locations for the evaluation of the output function. That means
the 20/80/200 training data points can be not only arbitrary but also at different locations
for each trajectory. This improvement enables DeepONet to predict accurately based on
any arbitrary locations, no matter how sparse the training data are, see Fig. 8(d)(e). From
Fig. 8(d), we note the predicted trajectory does not deviate from the ground truth. Moreover,
from our experience, once the training data is ample, DeepONet can predict smooth and
accurate results even if only a single data point is collected per trajectory. In general, we
have no prior knowledge about the right time interval at which to perform measurements
or we may have difficulty in acquiring very dense data, and hence DeepONet shows a clear
advantage both for its accuracy and versatility.
15

D.

Predictions for random initial bubble size
In this section, we extend the model to different initial bubble sizes. The initial condition

can be embedded in DeepONet in many ways, so here we choose to input R(t0 ) in the trunk
net along with time t. In the current example, the training dataset contains 30,000 pairs of
trajectories. Different from previous cases, the bubble radius trajectories are solved with
random initial size ranging from 1 × 10−5 m to 2 × 10−5 m. Some examples of the input and
output functions are presented in Fig. 9. As shown, the initial bubble size has a strong effect
not only on the initial value of the solution but also on the oscillation frequency and the
decay rate.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 9: (a) Sample trajectories of liquid pressure change with time (∆P (t)); (b)
Corresponding bubble radius (R(t)) with different initial size from the training dataset. The
corresponding ∆P (t) and R(t) are presented with the same color. The initial bubble size has
an effect on the oscillation frequency.

Upon training, DeepONet’s predictions agree with the ground truth very well. Fig. 10(a)
shows the comparison; each point’s horizontal coordinate is a bubble radius value predicted
by DeepONet at random times while the vertical coordinate is the corresponding ground
truth. The color indicates the density of overlapping points. We see that most points lie
on or near the diagonal line, which indicates an almost perfect prediction. Fig. 10(b) shows
some samples of bubble radius evolution predicted by DeepONet and solved with the R-P
equation from the test dataset. We note that the different oscillation magnitude, oscillation
frequency, and decay are accurately predicted by DeepONet.
16

(a)

(b)

FIG. 10: Comparison of DeepONet prediction and ground truth with random initial bubble
size. (a) Parity plot of DeepONet prediction and ground truth from the test dataset; (b)
Sample trajectories of prediction and ground truth from test dataset.
E.

Extrapolation: Predicting inputs outside the function space of the training

data
The DeepONet predictions shown previously are results for pressure field in the input
training range, i.e., the testing was performed with independent data but with pressure
field generated with l = 0.2 (Eq. (7)), the same correlation length as in the training data
(interpolation). In this section, we would like to obtain predictions with the trained DeepONet
for pressure fields that do not belong to the input function space, i.e., perform an extrapolation.
In particular, we want to use the trained DeepONet to predict the bubble radius based on
pressure fields generated with unseen correlation length l, ranging from 0.07 to 0.9. The other
parameters used are as follows: q in Eq. (7) equals 0.5, the network size is (50, 50, 50, 50)
for both trunk and branch net, and the training dataset contains 3000 pairs of trajectories.
These settings remain the same through this section.
In Fig. 11(a), we show the test error when we extrapolate to unseen pressure field with
l ranging from 0.07 to 0.9. The error rises moderately when l increases but may go up
quite sharply when l decreases. In Fig. 11(b), we use as training data a combination
of three different sets corresponding to values of l (0.1, 0.15 and 0.2). Even though the
training time and all other parameters are the same, the test errors of extrapolation are
reduced substantially. The light blue area in the plot indicates the interpolation range;
the test errors for l = 0.125 and l = 0.175 are smaller than that for l = 0.1. Then, we
design the representation of the input space more carefully, moving the window towards the
17

(a)

(b)
Training data

Training data

(d)

(c)
Training data

Training data

FIG. 11: Extrapolation test error versus different choices of training datasets. (a) Training
data: l = 0.2; (b) Training data: l = 0.1, 0.15, 0.2; (c) Training data: l = 0.07, 0.1, 0.15;
(d) Training data: l = 0.07, 0.15, 0.9. The size of the training data remains the same in all
cases. We note that by carefully designing the input space, the extrapolation performance
can be significantly improved.

smaller values of l, where we observed the highest error. In Fig. 11(c), the training data
is a combination of l = 0.07, 0.1, and 0.15. We observe that the errors with small l are
significantly reduced while for the extrapolation with large l the errors increase. Overall,
the errors in the entire range are more balanced. Fig. 11(d) shows an extra case when the
training data is a combination of l = 0.07, 0.15, and 0.9. We observe that the test errors are
reduced more uniformly because the input space is better presented, which indicates that a
better representation of the input space will lead to a higher accuracy for extrapolation.
Next, we will demonstrate how extrapolation can be improved when only a few data
are available for the output variable. In this example, the DeepONet is trained with liquid
pressure produced with l = 0.1, 0.15, and 0.2, as shown in Fig. 11(b), and is applied to
18

(a)

without new data

3 new data

(b)

L2 error = 15.3%

(d)

without new data

(c)

6 new data

L2 error = 9.7%

(e)

(f)

3 new data

L2 error = 19.5%

L2 error = 6.2%

6 new data

L2 error = 14.3%

L2 error = 11.1%

FIG. 12: Extrapolations of R(t) for l = 0.07 by adding a few new data (Training data:
l = 0.1, 0.15, 0.2). (a-c) Example 1; (d-f) Example 2. For both examples, we show
predictions without new data (a)(d), with 3 new data (b)(e), and with 6 new data (c)(f).
The inset figures show the corresponding liquid pressure. The new data points are selected
at the the pressure local extrema since the input function is known a priori. We fine-tune
the network on these sparse new data points (black cross) with a reduced learning rate and
epochs. Only the last layer of the trunk net is free to change by the new data. The L2 error
drops noticeably with just a few data for the extrapolation.

extrapolate for l = 0.07. We use the relative L2 -norm error to evaluate the performance,
namely
qP
T

P
T 2
t=0 (Rt − Rt )

 = qP

.

(8)

T
T
T 2
t=0 (Rt − R )

where RP and RT are the predicted and true bubble radii, respectively. Fig. 12(a)(c) show
two examples of using the pre-trained DeepONet for making predictions on new scenarios
(i.e., unseen data), where we can see that the L2 errors are relatively high. In order to
improve the performance of DeepONet for extrapolation, we assume that a few measurements
of the unseen profile are available. Moreover, since the input function is known a priori,
when doing extrapolation the locations of these additional data points can be selected based
on the local extremum of the pressure profile. Then, we fine-tune the pre-trained networks
19

based on only the new measurements by using the Adam optimizer with a reduced learning
rate (2 × 10−5 ) for 100 epochs. We note that only the last layer of the trunk net is tunable
during the fine-tuning process. The results are shown in Fig. 12(b)(c)(e)(f), from which we
can see that the predictions after fine-tuning are in good agreement with the ground truth.
In the first case, the L2 relative error drops from 15.3% to 9.7% (3 new data), or 6.2% (6 new
data), in the second case, the L2 error drops from 19.5% to 14.3% (3 new data), or 11.1% (6
new data). Overall, by performing transfer learning with sparse data points, we obtain much
better solutions compared to just the original pretrained networks. In addition, we note that
the transfer learning process is very fast, i.e., it takes only a few seconds either on a single
CPU or GPU.

IV.

MICROSCALE (STOCHASTIC) REGIME

The R-P equation is based on the continuum assumption, which is not valid in the
microscopic regime. Usually, particle-based simulation methods are good alternatives at the
microscale. In this section, the DPD method is employed to simulate the dynamics of bubble
size evolution at the microscale level and to generate data for training DeepONet. As with
MD systems, a DPD model consists of many interacting particles governed by Newton’s
equation of motion39 ,
mi

X

d2 ri
dvi
D
R
=
m
=
F
=
FC
i
i
ij + Fij + Fij ,
2
dt
dt
j6=i

(9)

where mi is the mass of a particle i, ri and vi are position and velocity vectors of the particle
i, and Fi is the total force acting on the particle i due to the presence of neighboring particles.
The summation for computing Fi is carried out over all neighboring particles within a cutoff
range. Beyond the cutoff, all pairwise interactions are considered negligible. The pairwise
D
R
force is comprised of a conservative force FC
ij , a dissipative force Fij and a random force Fij ,

which, respectively, are of the form:

FC
ij = aij ωC (rij )eij ,
FD
ij = −γij ωD (rij )(vij eij )eij ,
FR
ij · dt = σij ωR (rij )dW̃ij eij ,
20

(10)

where rij = |rij | = |ri − rj | is the distance between particles i and j, eij = rij /rij is the unit
vector, and vij = vi − vj is the velocity difference; dW̃ij is an independent increment of the
Wiener process40 . The coefficients aij , γij and σij determine the strength of the three forces,
respectively. To satisfy the fluctuation-dissipation theorem (FDT)40 and to maintain the
DPD system at a constant temperature39 , the dissipative force and the random force are
constrained by σij2 = 2γij kB T and ωD (rij ) = ωR2 (rij ). Common choices for weight functions
are ωC (rij ) = 1 − rij /rc , ωD (rij ) = ωR2 (rij ) = (1 − rij /rc )1/2 with rc being the cutoff radius.
With the purely repulsive conservative forces, DPD is most suitable for simulating a gas,
which fills the space spontaneously. To simulate the liquid phase, we use MDPD, which is an
extension of DPD by modifying the conservative force to include both a repulsive force and
an attractive force41,42 ,
FC
ij = Aij wc (rij ) + Bij (ρi + ρj )wd (rij ).

(11)

Because a DPD model with a single interaction range cannot maintain a stable interface43 ,
the repulsive contribution in Eq. (11) is set to act within a shorter range rd < rc than the
soft pair attractive potential. The many-body repulsion is chosen in the form of a self-energy
per particle, which is quadratic in the local density, Bij (ρi + ρj )wd (rij ), where B > 0. The
density of each particle is defined as

ρ̄i =

X

wρ (rij ),

(12)


2
r
1−
,
rd

(13)

j6=i

and its weight function wρ is defined as
15
wρ =
2πrd3
where wρ vanishes for r > rd .
Fig. 13 illustrates the DPD-MDPD coupled simulation system. To reduce the computational cost, a thin box with periodic boundaries in the x and z directions is used. The yellow
particles represent the gas phase, with the interaction force modeled by a DPD potential;
the blue particles represent the liquid phase, with the interaction force modeled by a MDPD
potential. The interaction force between gas and liquid particles is described by a DPD
potential, which can prevent the gas particles dissolving into the liquid phase. The top and
bottom solid walls are constructed by pre-equilibrium frozen particles. The number density
21

FIG. 13: Illustration of the microscale simulation. The gas particles (yellow) are aggregated
in the center surrounded by the liquid particles (blue). The boundary condition in the x and
z directions are periodic. The bottom wall is stationary while the top wall has one degree of
freedom in the y direction to adjust the system pressure. A time-varying external force
(green arrows) is applied on the top wall to change the system pressure. A Voronoi method
is used to compute the volume of each phase.
of wall particles is the same as the density of the liquid. The no-slip boundary method44 for
arbitrary-shape geometries is applied. To change the system pressure, the top wall is set to
have one degree of freedom moving just in the y direction. Before the simulation starts, a
uniform static external pressure is exerted on the top wall to reach an initial equilibrium state.
Then, the value of the external pressure evolves following a preset function. We continuously
record the volume of the gas phase and use it to compute the effective bubble radius. Because
the particles of a DPD system are randomly distributed in space, it is difficult to accurately
compute the volume of the gas bubble. In the present work, we adopt a three-dimensional
Voronoi tessellation45 to estimate the instantaneous volume occupied by gas particles. In
the Voronoi scheme, each particle in the system occupies a cell around it, which contains all
the space closer to that particle. In our case, the Voronoi cells take the form of irregular
polyhedra, see the inset of Fig. 13. Let Ω be the volume of a gas or liquid phase, we compute
22

the instantaneous volume-averaged virial stress based on the virial theorem46 ,
#
"
Np
X
1
1X
−mvαi vβi −
(rαi Fβi + rαj Fβj ) ,
Sαβ =
Ω i∈Ω
2 j=1

(14)

where α and β take values of x, y, z to generate the components of the stress. The first
term represents a kinetic energy contribution for a particle i. The second term is a pairwise
energy contribution due to interactions between particles i and j, where j loops over the
Np neighbors of particle i; ri and rj are the positions of the two particles in the pairwise
interaction, and Fi and Fj are the forces on the two particles resulting from the pairwise
interaction. We take the mean of diagonals of the negative stress tensor as the pressure:
1
Pphase = − (Sxx + Syy + Szz ).
3

(15)

Separate simulations are conducted to measure the properties of the gas and liquid phases. The
simulation setup and the measured properties of fluids are summarised in Table II. By mapping
the dimensionless properties (density, surface tension and viscosity) to properties of water at
20 °C, the scaling relationship can be determined47 : length reference [l] = 4.12 × 10−8 m, time
reference [t] = 1.79 × 10−9 s, and mass reference [m] = 8.82 × 10−21 kg. With this scaling
relationship, the dimensionless properties in the DPD simulation can be transformed to
physical values. For example, the bubble radius is 5.77 × 10−7 m, and the simulation time
span is approximately 3.58 × 10−6 s. The preset pressure on the top wall is generated using
GRF (Eq. (7), µ = 37.55, σ = 2.17) with an exponential function mask ensuring smooth
transition from the initial equilibrium state. Examples of pressure trajectories are presented
in Fig. 14.
We run 400 independent DPD simulations to generate the training data for DeepONet.
Each simulation can generate one pair of input and output functions. Fig. 15 shows two
representative simulations. In Fig. 15(a), we plot both the preset pressure on the top wall
and the measured liquid pressure. The measured liquid pressure exhibits noticeable noise
compared to smooth input pressure signal. Fig. 15(b) shows the measured bubble radius;
the corresponding ∆P (t) and R(t) are presented with the same color.
The setup of the DeepONet is summarized in Table III. Here, 50 evenly spaced sensors
are employed for the input function and 25 random spaced points for the output function.
Both branch and trunk nets have two hidden layers and 200 neurons per layer.
23

Pressure (DPD units)

42
40
38
36
34
0

250

500

750 1000 1250
Time (DPD units)

1500

1750

2000

FIG. 14: Samples of preset time-varying pressure on the top wall in training data. All
trajectories start from an equilibrium pressure, then enter a stochastic time-varying
low-pressure region. The dotted line indicates the initial equilibrium pressure.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 15: (a) Pressure on wall and pressure in liquid; (b) Corresponding bubble radius. The
liquid pressure and bubble radius are both computed from DPD simulations and they
exhibit considerable noise.

24

TABLE II: Simulation setup and fluid properties (DPD units).
Property

Value
X = 60 (periodic)

Box

Y = 66 (shrink-wrapped)
Z = 4 (periodic)

Temperature

kb T = 1.0

Cutoff

rc = 1.0

Time

T = 2000

Time step

t = 0.01

Pressure

see Eq. (7), µ = 37.55, σ = 2.17

System

MDPD parameter A = −40, B = −25, γ = 4.5, rd = 0.75
Number density

nl = 7.93

Particle mass

ml = 1.0

Liquid density

ρl = 7.93

Liquid

Dynamic viscosity µl = 8.36

Gas

Speed of sound

c = 18.52

DPD parameter

a = 5, γ = 4.5

Number density

ng = 8.25

Particle mass

mg = 0.2

Gas density

ρg = 1.65

Dynamic viscosity µg = 1.41
DPD parameter

a = 20, γ = 4.5

Pressure in liquid pl = 43.08
Interface Pressure in gas

pg = 44.96

Bubble radius

R = 14.05

Surface tension

γ = 26.42

TABLE III: Hyper-parameters for DeepONet.
# Pressure (Train+Test)

# Pressure sensor

# Radius sensor

# Train data

# Test data

400+100

50

25

10000

2500

Type of DeepONet

Branch depth

Branch width

Trunk depth

Trunk width

Unstacked

2

200

2

200

Pressure generator

Optimizer

Learning rate

Activation

# Epoch

Gaussian random

Adam

0.0005

ReLU

10000

25

Fig. 16(a) shows the loss histories for training and testing. Fig. 16(b) is the parity plot
of values predicted by DeepONet and DPD simulation results. We see that almost all
data points fall near the diagonal line, which indicates almost perfect accuracy. The small
discrepancy is mainly because the raw trajectory is noisy but the predicted trajectory is
quite smooth, see Fig. 17.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 16: (a) Loss histories of the training and testing; (b) Parity plot of DeepONet
prediction and DPD simulation results; the data points fall on the diagonal dashed line
indicating very good prediction.

Fig. 17 shows two representative cases of the DeepONet prediction. Even though the
DPD results exhibit high frequency fluctuations and we only collect sparse data points on
the noisy trajectory, DeepONet yields an accurate smooth trajectory, which captures the
mean trajectory of the data quite well.
The results shown above indicate that once trained, DeepONet can be used to infer
the microscale bubble growth from a complex particle simulation system, which cannot be
easily described by simple control functions. Conventional numerical simulation methods, in
which pair-list updates and inter-particle force calculation are required, are usually very time
consuming. For each DPD simulation, it takes 3 hours on a 16-core workstation, while it
takes only a fraction of a second for DeepONet to evaluate R(t), so the speed-up factor in
this case exceeds 200,000.
26

(a)

Liquid pressure (Input)

Bubble radius (Output)

(b)

FIG. 17: Two representative DeepONet predictions (a and b). The plots in the left column
correspond to the preset pressure; the plots in the right column show a comparison of the
bubble radius produced by DPD simulations and predicted by DeepONet. DeepONet’s
prediction is close to the mean of the fluctuating trajectory.

V.

SUMMARY
In this paper, we first introduce the macroscopic model (R-P) and microscopic model

(DPD) for the problem of growth of a single bubble due to time-varying changes in the
ambient liquid pressure. We then demonstrate the effectiveness of DeepONet for both models.
We use Gaussian random fields to generate the various pressure fields, which are the input
signals to the dynamical system. We investigate the influence of the network depth, width,
and data size, and by comparing to LSTM we demonstrated a unique advantage of DeepONet,
i.e., the flexibility in data density and location, which will be very useful when we have no
prior knowledge of how much data density is sufficient or when we have restrictions on data
acquisition. Moreover, we test the case when the input is not within the input space, i.e., the
27

correlation length of the pressure field is out of the training range. In this case, we cannot
obtain very accurate predictions, however, we resolve this issue by transfer learning and
fine-tuning the trunk net of the pre-trained DeepONet with just a few new data points. In
the microscale regime, the data generated by DPD model contain high frequency fluctuations.
We show that without any extra data processing, DeepONet can learn the mean component
of these noisy raw data, and the computational time could be reduced from 48 (3 hours
× 16 cores) CPU hours to a fraction of second for a speed-up over 200,000. Learning the
stochastic fluctuations accurately requires a more careful design and training of DeepONet
and we leave this for future work
More broadly, the results in this paper show that DeepONet can be used both in the
macroscopic and microscopic regimes of the bubble growth dynamics, which creates a good
foundation for a unified neural network model that could predict the results from macroscale
to microscale seamlessly. This topic is currently under investigation and we will report such
results in future work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge support from DOE/PhILMs DE-SC0019453.

DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.

REFERENCES
1

S. H. Rudy, S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, “Data-driven discovery of partial
differential equations,” Science Advances 3, e1602614 (2017).

2

K. Champion, B. Lusch, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, “Data-driven discovery of
coordinates and governing equations,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

116, 22445–22451 (2019).
28

3

L. Lu, P. Jin, and G. E. Karniadakis, “DeepONet: Learning nonlinear operators for
identifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of operators,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03193 (2019).

4

M. Raissi, A. Yazdani, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Hidden fluid mechanics: Learning velocity
and pressure fields from flow visualizations,” Science 367, 1026–1030 (2020).

5

M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed neural networks: A
deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear
partial differential equations,” Journal of Computational Physics 378, 686–707 (2019).

6

P. Jin, Z. Zhang, A. Zhu, Y. Tang, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Sympnets: Intrinsic structurepreserving symplectic networks for identifying hamiltonian systems,” Neural Networks 132,

166–179 (2020).
7

Y. Chen, L. Lu, G. E. Karniadakis, and L. Dal Negro, “Physics-informed neural networks
for inverse problems in nano-optics and metamaterials,” Optics Express 28, 11618–11633

(2020).
8

G. Carleo, I. Cirac, K. Cranmer, L. Daudet, M. Schuld, N. Tishby, L. Vogt-Maranto, and
L. Zdeborová, “Machine learning and the physical sciences,” Reviews of Modern Physics
91, 045002 (2019).

9

R. M. Cichy and D. Kaiser, “Deep neural networks as scientific models,” Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 23, 305–317 (2019).

10

C. J. Lapeyre, A. Misdariis, N. Cazard, D. Veynante, and T. Poinsot, “Training convolutional neural networks to estimate turbulent sub-grid scale reaction rates,” Combustion
and Flame 203, 255–264 (2019).

11

K. Bieker, S. Peitz, S. L. Brunton, J. N. Kutz, and M. Dellnitz, “Deep model predictive
flow control with limited sensor data and online learning,” Theoretical and Computational
Fluid Dynamics , 1–15 (2020).

12

Y. Xie, E. Franz, M. Chu, and N. Thuerey, “tempoGAN: A temporally coherent, volumetric
gan for super-resolution fluid flow,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37, 1–15 (2018).

13

G. C. Peng, M. Alber, A. B. Tepole, W. R. Cannon, S. De, S. Dura-Bernal, K. Garikipati,
G. E. Karniadakis, W. W. Lytton, P. Perdikaris, et al., “Multiscale modeling meets machine
learning: What can we learn?” Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering , 1–21

(2020).

29

14

Z. Mao, A. D. Jagtap, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed neural networks for
high-speed flows,” Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 360, 112789

(2020).
15

C. Yu, P. Zhang, J. Wang, and L. Jiang, “Superwettability of gas bubbles and its application:
from bioinspiration to advanced materials,” Advanced Materials 29, 1703053 (2017).

16

B. Dollet, P. Marmottant, and V. Garbin, “Bubble dynamics in soft and biological matter,”
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 51, 331–355 (2019).

17

A. Jamburidze, M. De Corato, A. Huerre, A. Pommella, and V. Garbin, “High-frequency
linear rheology of hydrogels probed by ultrasound-driven microbubble dynamics,” Soft
Matter 13, 3946–3953 (2017).

18

B. R. Novak, Molecular simulation studies of heterogeneous bubble nucleation: effects of

surface chemistry and topology (University of Notre Dame, 2007).
19

L. Rayleigh, “Viii. on the pressure developed in a liquid during the collapse of a spherical
cavity,” The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science
34, 94–98 (1917).

20

S. Maruyama, T. Kimura, and Y. Yamaguchi, “A molecular dynamics simulation of a
bubble nucleation on solid surface,” in National Heat Transfer Symposium of Japan, Vol. 34

(Citeseer, 1997) pp. 675–676.
21

X. Li, P. M. Vlahovska, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Continuum-and particle-based modeling
of shapes and dynamics of red blood cells in health and disease,” Soft Matter 9, 28–37

(2013).
22

Y. Wang, Z. Li, J. Ouyang, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Controlled release of entrapped
nanoparticles from thermoresponsive hydrogels with tunable network characteristics,” Soft
Matter 16, 4756–4766 (2020).

23

Z. Li, G. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Ma, and Z. Zhou, “Three dimensional flow structures in a
moving droplet on substrate: A dissipative particle dynamics study,” Physics of Fluids 25,
072103 (2013).

24

K. Zhang, Z. Li, M. Maxey, S. Chen, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Self-cleaning of hydrophobic
rough surfaces by coalescence-induced wetting transition,” Langmuir 35, 2431–2442 (2019).

25

C. Lin, L. Yang, F. Chen, S. Chen, and H. Yin, “A dissipative particle dynamics and
discrete element method coupled model for particle interactions in sedimentation toward
the fabrication of a functionally graded material,” Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical
30

and Engineering Aspects 604, 125326 (2020).
26

C.-J. Wu, K.-C. Chu, Y.-J. Sheng, and H.-K. Tsao, “Sliding dynamic behavior of a
nanobubble on a surface,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 121, 17932–17940 (2017).

27

T. Tran-Duc, N. Phan-Thien, and B. Cheong Khoo, “Rheology of bubble suspensions
using dissipative particle dynamics. part i: A hard-core dpd particle model for gas bubbles,”
Journal of Rheology 57, 1715–1737 (2013).

28

D. Pan, G. Zhao, Y. Lin, and X. Shao, “Mesoscopic modelling of microbubble in liquid
with finite density ratio of gas to liquid,” EPL (Europhysics Letters) 122, 20003 (2018).

29

T. Chen and H. Chen, “Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural networks
with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 6, 911–917 (1995).

30

L. Lu, X. Meng, Z. Mao, and G. E. Karniadakis, “DeepXDE: A deep learning library for
solving differential equations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04502 (2019).

31

M. S. Plesset and A. Prosperetti, “Bubble dynamics and cavitation,” Annual Review of
Fluid Mechanics 9, 145–185 (1977).

32

C. E. Brennen, Cavitation and bubble dynamics (Cambridge University Press, 2013).

33

A. Prosperetti, “Vapor bubbles,” Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 49 (2017).

34

S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Computation 9,

1735–1780 (1997).
35

R. Fu, Z. Zhang, and L. Li, “Using LSTM and GRU neural network methods for traffic
flow prediction,” in 2016 31st Youth Academic Annual Conference of Chinese Association

of Automation (YAC) (IEEE, 2016) pp. 324–328.
36

J. del Águila Ferrandis, M. Triantafyllou, C. Chryssostomidis, and G. E. Karniadakis,

“Learning functionals via LSTM neural networks for predicting vessel dynamics in extreme
sea states.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.13382 (2019).
37

A. Alahi, K. Goel, V. Ramanathan, A. Robicquet, L. Feifei, and S. Savarese, “Social LSTM:
Human trajectory prediction in crowded spaces,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on

computer vision and pattern recognition (2016) pp. 961–971.
38

D. M. Nelson, A. C. Pereira, and R. A. de Oliveira, “Stock market’s price movement
prediction with LSTM neural networks,” in 2017 International joint conference on neural

networks (IJCNN) (IEEE, 2017) pp. 1419–1426.

31

39

R. D. Groot and P. B. Warren, “Dissipative particle dynamics: Bridging the gap between
atomistic and mesoscopic simulation,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 107, 4423–4435

(1997).
40

P. Español and P. Warren, “Statistical mechanics of dissipative particle dynamics,” EPL

(Europhysics Letters) 30, 191 (1995).
41

P. Warren, “Vapor-liquid coexistence in many-body dissipative particle dynamics,” Physical
Review E 68, 066702 (2003).

42

M. Arienti, W. Pan, X. Li, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Many-body dissipative particle
dynamics simulation of liquid/vapor and liquid/solid interactions,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics 134, 204114 (2011).

43

I. Pagonabarraga and D. Frenkel, “Dissipative particle dynamics for interacting systems,”
The Journal of Chemical Physics 115, 5015–5026 (2001).

44

Z. Li, X. Bian, Y. Tang, and G. E. Karniadakis, “A dissipative particle dynamics method
for arbitrarily complex geometries,” Journal of Computational Physics 355, 534–547 (2018).

45

C. H. Rycroft, “VORO++: a three-dimensional voronoi cell library in C++.” Chaos 19,
041111 (2009).

46

D. Tsai, “The virial theorem and stress calculation in molecular dynamics,” The Journal
of Chemical Physics 70, 1375–1382 (1979).

47

C. Lin, S. Chen, L. Xiao, and Y. Liu, “Tuning drop motion by chemical chessboardpatterned surfaces: a many-body dissipative particle dynamics study,” Langmuir 34,
2708–2715 (2018).

32

