ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

1

Federated Learning for Internet of Things:
A Comprehensive Survey

arXiv:2104.07914v1 [eess.SP] 16 Apr 2021

Dinh C. Nguyen, Ming Ding, Pubudu N. Pathirana, Aruna Seneviratne,
Jun Li, and H. Vincent Poor, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) is penetrating many
facets of our daily life with the proliferation of intelligent services and applications empowered by artificial intelligence (AI).
Traditionally, AI techniques require centralized data collection
and processing that may not be feasible in realistic application
scenarios due to the high scalability of modern IoT networks
and growing data privacy concerns. Federated Learning (FL)
has emerged as a distributed collaborative AI approach that
can enable many intelligent IoT applications, by allowing for
AI training at distributed IoT devices without the need for data
sharing. In this article, we provide a comprehensive survey of the
emerging applications of FL in IoT networks, beginning from an
introduction to the recent advances in FL and IoT to a discussion
of their integration. Particularly, we explore and analyze the
potential of FL for enabling a wide range of IoT services,
including IoT data sharing, data offloading and caching, attack
detection, localization, mobile crowdsensing, and IoT privacy
and security. We then provide an extensive survey of the use
of FL in various key IoT applications such as smart healthcare,
smart transportation, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), smart
cities, and smart industry. The important lessons learned from
this review of the FL-IoT services and applications are also
highlighted. We complete this survey by highlighting the current
challenges and possible directions for future research in this
booming area.
Index Terms—Federated learning, Internet of Things, Artificial
Intelligence, Machine Learning, Privacy.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of the
Internet of Things (IoT) which provides ubiquitous sensing
and computing capabilities to connect a broad range of things
to the Internet [1]. To obtain insights into data generated from
ubiquitous IoT devices, artificial intelligence (AI) techniques
Dinh C. Nguyen is with the School of Engineering, Deakin University,
Waurn Ponds, VIC 3216, Australia, and also with Data61, CSIRO, Docklands,
Melbourne, Australia (e-mail: cdnguyen@deakin.edu.au).
Ming
Ding
is
with
Data61,
CSIRO,
Australia
(email:
ming.ding@data61.csiro.au).
Pubudu N. Pathirana is with the School of Engineering, Deakin University,
Waurn Ponds, VIC 3216, Australia (email: pubudu.pathirana@deakin.edu.au).
Aruna Seneviratne is with the School of Electrical Engineering and
Telecommunications, University of New South Wales (UNSW), NSW, Australia (e-mail: a.seneviratne@unsw.edu.au).
Jun Li is with the School of Electrical and Optical Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China (e-mail: jun.li
@njust.edu.cn).
H. Vincent Poor is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA (e-mail:
poor@princeton.edu).
This work was supported in part by the CSIRO Data61, Australia, and in
part by U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-1908308. The
work of Jun Li was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 61872184.

such as deep learning (DL) have been widely exploited to
train data models for enabling intelligent IoT applications such
as smart healthcare, smart transportation, and smart city [2].
Traditionally, AI functions are placed in a cloud server or a
data center for data learning and modeling [3], which incurs
critical limitations given the IoT data explosion. According to
Cisco, there will be nearly 850 ZB of data generated by all
people, machines, and things at the network edge by 2021. In
sharp contrast, the global data center traffic will only reach
20.6 ZB in this year [4]. With such a tremendous growth of
IoT data at the network edge, the offloading of massive IoT
data to the remote servers may be infeasible do to the required
network resources and the incurred latency. The use of thirdparty servers for AI training also raises privacy concerns such
as data breaches as the training data may contain sensitive
information such as user addresses or personal preferences
[5]. It is thus highly necessary for developing innovative AI
approaches to realize efficient and privacy-enhanced intelligent
IoT networks and applications.
Recently, the concept of federated learning (FL) has been
proposed for building intelligent and privacy-enhanced IoT
systems. Technically, FL is a distributed collaborative AI
approach that allows for data training by coordinating multiple
devices with a central server without sharing actual datasets
[6]. For instance, multiple IoT devices can act as workers to
communicate with an aggregator (e.g., a server) for performing
neural network training in intelligent IoT networks. More
specifically, the aggregator first initiates a global model with
learning parameters. Each worker downloads the current model
from the aggregator, computes its model update, e.g., via
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), by using its local dataset,
and offloads the computed local update to the aggregator.
Then, the aggregator combines all local model updates and
constructs a new improved global model. By using the computing power of distributed workers, the aggregator can enhance
the training quality while minimizing user privacy leakage.
Finally, the local workers download the global update from the
aggregator, and compute their next local update until the global
training is complete. With its innovative operational concept,
FL can offer various important benefits for IoT applications
as follows:
•

Data Privacy Enhancement: In FL, the raw data are not
required for the training at the aggregator. Therefore,
the leakage of sensitive user information to the external
third-party is minimized and a degree of data privacy
is provided. Following the increasingly stringent data

2

privacy protection legislation such as the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [7], the privacy protection
feature makes FL an ideal solution for building intelligent
and safe IoT systems.
• Low-latency Network Communication: Since there is no
requirement for transmitting IoT data to the server, the
use of FL helps reduce communication latencies caused
by data offloading. In return, it also saves network resources, e.g., spectrum and transmit power, in the data
training.
• Enhanced Learning Quality: By attracting much computation resources and diverse datasets from a network of
IoT devices, FL has the potential to enhance the convergence rate of the overall training process and achieve
better learning accuracy rates [8], which might not be
achieved by using centralized AI approaches with insufficient data and constrained computational capabilities.
In return, FL also improves the scalability of intelligent
networks due to its distributed learning nature.
With these unique advantages, FL has been proposed for use in
a variety of IoT applications, such as smart healthcare, smart
transportation, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), etc. For
example, FL has facilitated smart health services by enabling
machine learning (ML) modeling without sharing patient data
across multiple medical institutions [9]. By using FL, health
data owners, e.g., hospitals, do not need to exchange their
healthcare records with each other; instead, they train the
AI model locally and only upload the trained parameters
to the aggregator for global computation. In this way, FL
creates collaborative healthcare environments among different
hospitals to accelerate patient diagnosis and treatment, without
sacrificing user privacy. In transportation systems, FL has
also proved its potential to provide smart vehicular services
[10], such as autonomous driving, road safety prediction,
vehicular detection with high training accuracy and privacy
enhancement, by coordinating vehicles with roadside units
for collaborative data learning. The success of recent FL-IoT
applications makes now the right time to draw attention to this
prominent area of research.
A. Comparison and Our Contributions
Driven by the recent advances of FL and IoT, several
reviews of related work have appeared. For example, the study
in [11] provided a survey of the FL concept and analyzed
its key system components such as data distribution, machine
learning model, privacy mechanism, and communication architecture. Similarly, the authors in [12] discussed the FL concept
from the architecture perspective, along with the analysis of
basic applications of FL in business. Other articles in [13]–
[15] also presented the concept of FL architectures, software,
platforms, and protocols and discussed a few possible research
challenges in FL deployments. Meanwhile, the study in [16]
analyzed technical challenges in FL system, including data
privacy bottlenecks and network attacks. Moreover, the use
of FL in mobile edge networks was investigated in [17].
The key focuses are on the discussion of the challenges in
FL implementation in edge networks and the roles of FL

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

in edge network optimization. Recently, the potential of FL
in wireless networks has been also explored from various
aspects. For example, an overview on the use of FL in fog
radio access networks was presented in [18], with a discussion
of the fundamental FL theory with respect to the accuracy
loss correction and the model compression. An overview on
the use of FL for wireless communications was provided in
[19] where the roles of FL in 5G applications are discussed,
such as edge computing, spectrum sharing, and 5G core
network management. The integration of FL and 6G wireless
applications was explored in [20], where the key challenges
of using FL for 6G networks are highlighted. Furthermore,
a survey in [21] paid attention to the discussion of the data
preservation methods applied to FL to protect users in the
FL training. Another work in [22] presented a survey on the
key architectures of FL models with a very brief introduction
to the use of FL in health informatics. The potential of FL
in vehicular networks was explored in [23], and the integrated
FL-UAVs models with representative use cases were discussed
in [24]. The comparison of the related works and our paper is
summarized in Table I.
Although FL has been studied extensively in the literature,
there is no existing work to provide a comprehensive and
dedicated review of the use of FL in IoT networks and
applications, to the best of our knowledge. The potential of
FL in IoT services, such as IoT data sharing, data offloading,
localization, etc., has not been explored in the open literature
[11]–[15], [17]. Moreover, a holistic discussion of the integrated FL-IoT applications from smart transportation to smart
city is still missing [22]–[24]. These limitations motivate us
to conduct a more comprehensive review of the integration of
FL in IoT networks. Particularly, we provide a state-of-the-art
survey of the applications of FL in various key IoT services
such as IoT data sharing, data offloading and caching, attack
detection, localization, mobile crowdsensing, and IoT privacy
and security. The key contribution of this paper lies in the
extensive discussion of the use of FL in a wide range of IoT
applications, including smart healthcare, smart transportation,
UAVs, smart city, and smart industry. The key lessons learned
from the survey are also given. Finally, we discuss a number of
important research challenges and highlight interesting future
directions in FL-IoT. To this end, the key contributions of this
article are highlighted as follows:
1) We present a state-of-the-art survey on the application
of FL in IoT networks, starting from an introduction to
the recent advances in FL and IoT and the discussion of
the visions behind their integration.
2) We discuss the opportunities created by FL in many
key IoT services, namely IoT data sharing, data offloading and caching, attack detection, localization, mobile
crowdsensing, and IoT privacy and security.
3) We perform a holistic investigation and analysis of
the potential of FL in a number of IoT applications,
including smart healthcare, smart transportation, UAVs,
smart city, and smart industry with discussions on communications and networking aspects. Taxonomy tables to
summarize the key technical aspects, contributions and

3

TABLE I: Existing surveys on FL-related topics and our new contributions.
Related
works
[11]

Topic

Key contributions

Limitations

FL concept

The applications of FL in IoT networks have
not been presented.

[12]

FL concept

[13]

FL concept

A survey on the FL system components, such as data distribution,
machine learning model, privacy mechanism, and communication
architecture.
A survey on the FL concept with a basic introduction to
definitions, architectures and applications of FL.
A survey on the architectures, algorithms, and data processing
methods in FL-based wireless networks.

[14]

FL concept

A survey on the FL hardware, software, platforms, and protocols
with limited discussion of FL-based healthcare use cases.

[15]

FL concept

[16]

FL and data
privacy

[17]

FL and mobile
edge networks

[18]

FL and fog radio
access networks

[19]

FL and wireless
communication

[20]

FL and 6G
communication
FL and data
privacy in IoT
analytics
FL and health
informatics
FL and vehicular
networks

A systematic survey on the FL concept, research challenges and
solutions from the perspective of software engineering.
A brief overview on the data privacy challenges and attacks in FL
systems, along with possible solutions for data privacy protection
in FL designs.
A survey on the integration of FL and edge computing, including
the discussion of the challenges in FL implementation in edge
networks and the analysis the use of FL in edge network
optimization.
An overview on the use of FL in fog radio access networks, with a
discussion of the fundamental FL theory with respect to the
accuracy loss correction and the model compression.
An overview on the use of FL for wireless communications and
the roles of FL in 5G applications such as edge computing,
spectrum sharing, and 5G core network management.
A survey on the integration of FL and 6G applications, along with
a discussion of the challenges in the use of FL for 6G networks.
A survey on the data preservation methods applied to FL to protect
users in the FL training.

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

FL and UAVs

Our paper

FL and IoT

A survey on the concept and key architectures of FL models with a
very brief introduction to the use of FL in health informatics.
A survey on the advances of FL and its application in vehicular
networks.
A brief survey on the application of FL in UAVs networks.

An extensive survey on the FL-IoT integration. Particularly,
We extensively discuss the roles of FL in various key IoT
services, i.e., IoT data sharing, data offloading and caching,
attack detection, localization, mobile crowdsensing, and IoT
privacy and security.
• The use of FL in important IoT applications is also analyzed in
detail, including smart healthcare, smart transportation, UAVs,
smart city, and smart industry.
• Taxonomy tables and key lessons learned are provided to
provide insights into FL-IoT integration. Research challenges
and directions are also highlighted.

The applications of FL in IoT networks have
not been presented.
The paper only analyzes the use of FL in
wireless networks, while its roles in IoT have
not been presented.
The analysis of FL-healthcare is limited.
Moreover, discussions for other IoT domains
are lacked.
The use of FL in IoT services and applications
has not been presented.
The paper only focuses on privacy aspects in
FL.
The applications of FL in IoT networks and
services have not been explored and discussed.

The applications of FL in IoT networks have
not been presented.
The benefits of FL in IoT services such as IoT
data sharing data offloading, localization have
not been explored.
The discussion of the FL applications for IoT
networks has not been provided.
The paper only discusses on the privacy aspect
of FL-IoT while a comprehensive survey on
the FL-IoT integration is missing.
The paper only focuses on discussing the roles
of FL in the healthcare domain.
The paper only focuses on discussing the roles
of FL in the vehicular network and
transportation domain.
Only analysis on the FL-UAV is provided
while other domains such as smart city, smart
industry are not considered.
-

•

limitations of each FL approach used in IoT are also
provided.
4) From the survey of FL-IoT services and applications, the
key lessons learned are highlighted. Lastly, we identify a
couple of important research challenges and then discuss
possible directions for future research toward the full
realization of FL-IoT.
B. Structure of The Survey
This survey is organized as shown in Fig. 1. Section II
discusses the state-of-the-art of FL and IoT, and the visions of
their integration are also highlighted. We provide an extensive
discussion of the use of FL in important IoT services in
Section III, including IoT data sharing, data offloading and

caching, attack detection, localization, and mobile crowdsensing. The opportunities brought by FL in a number of key IoT
applications, such as smart healthcare, smart transportation,
UAVs, smart city, and smart industry, are then explored and
analyzed in Section IV. From the comprehensive survey,
we summarize and highlight several key lessons learned in
Section V. Section VI discusses the key research challenges,
including threats in FL, performance issues of FL, resource
management in FL systems, and heterogeneity issues in IoT
networks, along with possible directions for future research.
Finally, Section VII concludes the article. A list of key
acronyms and abbreviations used throughout the paper is given
in Table II.

4

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

Structure of the Survey

Section II:
FL and IoT: State of the
Art

Federated Learning

Section III:
FL for IoT Services

Section IV:
FL for IoT Applications

FL Serving as an Alternative to
IoT Data Sharing

FL for Smart
Healthcare

FL for the Optimization of IoT
Data Offloading and Caching

FL for Smart
Transportation

FL for IoT Attack Detection

FL for Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles

FL for IoT Localization

FL for Smart City

FL for IoT Mobile
Crowdsensing

FL for Smart Industry

Section V:
Lessons Learned

Lessons Learned from
FL-IoT Services

Internet of Things

Visions of the Use of
FL in IoT

Lessons Learned from
FL-IoT Applications

Section VI:
Research Challenges and
Directions
Security and Privacy Issues in
FL
Communication and Learning
Convergence issues of FLIoT
Resource Management in FLIoT

Deploying AI Functions on
IoT Sensors
Standard Specifications

FL for IoT Privacy and Security

Fig. 1: Organization of this article.
TABLE II: List of key acronyms.
Acronyms
FL
IoT
HFL
VFL
FTL
CFL
DFL
AI
ML
DL
DRL
SVM
NN
DNN
CNN
RNN
LSTM
MEC
UAV
BS
V2V
RSU
EHR
Non-IID Data

Definitions
Federated Learning
Internet of Things
Horizontal Federated Learning
Vertical Federated Learning
Federated Transfer Learning
Centralized Federated Learning
Decentralized Federated Learning
Artificial Intelligence
Machine Learning
Deep Learning
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Support Vector Machine
Neural Network
Deep Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network
Recurrent Neural Networks
Long-short Term Memory
Mobile Edge Computing
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Base Station
Vehicle-to-Vehicle
Roadside Unit
Electronic Health Record
Nonindependent and Identically
Distributed Data

II. FL AND I OT: S TATE OF THE A RT
In this section, we present the state-of-the-art of FL and
IoT. The visions of their integration are also discussed.
A. Federated Learning
Since its inception in 2016 [25], FL has transformed many
intelligent IoT applications by offering new AI solutions with
its distributed and privacy-enhancing nature. The arrival of
this emerging distributed AI technology has the potential to
reshape the current intelligent IoT systems with advanced
FL architectures. Following the recent advances in mobile
hardware and the growing concerns of privacy leakage, FL
is particularly attractive for building distributed IoT systems,
by pushing AI functions, e.g., AI data training, to the network
edge at IoT devices where the data reside. As a result, the
user data are never shared directly with the third party while

enabling the cooperative training of a shared global model,
which benefits both network operators and IoT users in terms
of network resource savings and privacy enhancement. FL
thus would be a strong alternative for traditional centralized
AI approaches and helps accelerate the deployment of IoT
services and applications at a larger scale. We here introduce
the key concept of FL and then present some important FL
categories used in IoT networks.
1) Key FL Concept: The FL concept in IoT networks is
composed of two main entities: the data clients, e.g., IoT
devices and an aggregation server located at a base station
(BS) or an access point (AP), as illustrated in Fig. 2. Let
K = {1, 2, ..., K} denote the set of participants who use IoT
devices such as smartphone, laptop or tablet to collaboratively
implement an FL algorithm for performing an IoT task.
For example, in an IoT-based vehicular network [26], [27],
vehicles can join a shared FL process to sense the road traffic
environment and produce a comprehensive traffic routing map
for reducing traffic congestion. In the next generation of IoT
networks, FL is of paramount importance for realizing full
intelligence in IoT systems at the network edge, since a BS
cannot collect all data from distributed IoT devices for AI/ML
training. FL allows IoT users and the BS to train a shared
global model while the raw data are remained at users’ devices.
In an FL process, each IoT user k participates in training
a shared AI/ML model by using their own dataset Dk∈K .
Hereinafter, the FL model trained at the IoT device is called
the local model wk . After local training, IoT users upload their
local model updates to the BS that then aggregates to build a
shared model, called the global model wG . By relying on the
distributed data training at the IoT devices, the aggregation
server at the BS can enrich the training performance without
significantly compromising user data privacy. As shown in
Fig. 2, the general FL process includes the following key steps:
1) System Initialization and Device Selection: The aggregator chooses an IoT tasks such as human activity recogni-

5

FL Aggregation

Aggregator

IoT Devices

1

Server
Model
Upload

Aggregation

Base
Station

Model
Download

Local
Model

Global Model

Model
Aggregation

Access
Point

2

3
Global
Model

Smart
phones
Local
computation

Local
computation

Local
computation

...

Local Data

Local Data

Personal
Computer

Industrial
Sensors

Mobile
Computers

Mobile
phone

Global
Model

Global
Model

Local Data

Local Model

Local Model

Local Model

FL-IoT Architecture

Smart
Watch

Communication in FL-IoT

Fig. 2: The network architecture and communication process for FL-IoT.
tion and sets up learning parameters, e.g., learning rates
and communication rounds. A subset of IoT devices to
participate in the FL process is also selected. Several
possible selection factors for this selection can be channel conditions and the importance of local updates of
each IoT device [17].
2) Distributed Local Training and Updates: After the training configuration, the server initializes a new model,
i.e., w0G , and transmit it to the IoT clients to start the
distributed training. Each client k trains a local model
using its own dataset Dk and computes an update wk
by minimizing a loss function F(wk ):
w∗k = arg min F(wk ), k ∈ K.

(1)

Here, the loss function can be different for different
FL algorithms [28]. For example, with a set of inputoutput pairs {xi , yi }K
i=1 , the loss function F of a linear
regression FL model can be defined as: F(wk ) =
2
1
T
2 xi wk − yi . Then, each client k uploads its computed update wk to the server for aggregation.
3) Model Aggregation and Download: After collecting all
model updates from local clients, the server aggregates
them and calculates a new version of global model as
wG = P

1

K
X

k∈K |Dk | k=1

|Dk |wk ,

(2)

by solving the following optimization problem:
K

(P 1) : min

wk∈K

subject to

1 X
F(wk )
K
k=1

(C1) : w1 = w2 = ... = wK = wG .

(3)

Here, the loss function F reflects the accuracy of the
FL algorithm, e.g., the accuracy of an FL-based object
classification task [29]. Moreover, the constraint (C1)
ensures that all clients and the server shares the same
learning model over the FL task after each training
round. After the derivation of the model, the server
broadcasts the new global update wG to all clients for
optimizing the local models in the next learning round.
The FL process is iterated until the global loss function
converges or a desired accuracy is achieved.
2) FL Classifications: Reviewing the recent advances of
FL algorithms used in IoT, we here classify FL into two key
dimensions, namely data partitioning and networking structure
[11], [12].
- Data partitioning: Based on how training data are distributed over the sample and feature spaces, this category can
be divided into three small classes, including horizontal FL,
vertical FL, and federated transfer learning [12] as summarized
in Fig. 3.
•

Horizontal FL (HFL): In HFL systems, all learning
clients cooperatively train a global FL model using their
local datasets with the same feature space but different
sample space, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Due to the same
data feature, clients can use a same AI model (e.g.,
linear regression, SVM) for their local training. In a HFL
system, each client locally trains its AI model to compute
a local update. For improved security, the computed local
update can be masked by using encryption or differential
privacy techniques [13]. Then, the server aggregates all
local updates from clients and computes the new global
update without the need for direct access to local data.

6

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

HFL Server

Transfer features from
different spaces to the
same representation
for training

Aggregation

Aggregation

...

...
Local
training

Local
training

FTL Server

VFL Server

Feature
Database with the same
Sample
feature space but
different sample spaces.
Local
Data K
Local Data 1
Feature
Sample

(a) Horizontal Federated Learning
(HFL)

Encryption

Local
training

Aggregation

...
Local
training

Encryption

Local
training

Local
training

Database with different
Feature
Sample
feature spaces but the
same sample space.
Local Data K
Local Data 1

Database with different
Feature
Sample
feature spaces and
different sample spaces.
Local Data K
Local Data 1

(b) Vertical Federated Learning
(VFL)

(c) Federated Transfer Learning
(FTL)

Feature
Sample

Feature
Sample

Fig. 3: Types of FL models with data partitioning.
Finally, the server sends back the global update to all
clients for the next round of local learning. The above
process iterates until the loss function converges or a
desirable accuracy is achieved. In IoT applications, an
example of HFL is Wake-word detection [30], e.g., voice
assistants in a smart home. In this case, users speak the
same sentence (feature space) with the different types of
voice (sample space) on their smartphones and then the
local speaking updates are averaged by a parameter server
to create a global model for voice recognition.
• Vertical FL (VFL): Different from HFL, VFL solves the
shared AI model learning in a network of clients which
have the same sample space with different data feature
spaces [31], as shown in Fig. 3(b). In VFL, an entity
alignment approach is adopted to collect overlapped data
samples of clients. These samples are combined to train
a common AI model using encryption techniques. An
example of VFL in IoT applications can be the shared
learning model among entities in a smart city, e.g., ecommerce companies and a banking institution. In a
smart city, an e-commerce company and a bank (different
data feature) which serve city customers (same sample
space) can join a VFL process to cooperatively train an
AI model using their datasets, e.g., historic user payment
at e-commerce companies and user account balance at
the bank. Using this model, VFL can estimate the optimal
personalized loans for all customers based on their online
shopping behaviours.
• Federated Transfer learning (FTL): FTL [32] aims to
extend the sample space from the VFL architecture with
more learning clients that have datasets with different
sample space and different feature space, as shown in
Fig. 3(c). FTL transfers features from different feature
spaces to the same representation that is used to train data
aggregated from multiple clients. Also, to preserve data
privacy and ensure security in the learning, encryption
techniques such as random masks are also employed to
encrypt gradient updates in the model update stage. Based
on the combined updates from learning participants, the

aggregation server can perform model learning to find
the global update by minimizing a loss function [33]. In
IoT networks, FTL can be used in various domains, such
as federated healthcare. For example, FTL can support
disease diagnosis by collaborating different countries with
multiple hospitals which have different patients (sample
space) with different medication tests (feature space). In
this way, FTL can enrich the shared AI model output for
improving the accuracy of diagnosis.
- Networking structure: From the networking perspective,
this category can be divided into two small classes, including
centralized FL and decentralized FL [11] as summarized in
Fig. 4.
• Centralized FL (CFL): CFL is one of the most popular
FL architectures used in FL-IoT systems. As shown in
Fig. 4(a), a CFL system contains a central server and a
set of clients to perform an FL model. In a single round of
training, all clients participate in training a network model
in parallel using their own datasets. Then, all the clients
transmit the trained parameters to the central server which
aggregates them by using a weighted averaging algorithm
such as Federated Averaging (FedAvg) [34]. Then, the
computed global model is sent back to all clients for the
next round of training. At the end of the training process,
each client achieves a same global model along with
its personalized model. In CFL, the server is regarded
as the key component of the network for coordinating
the aggregation and distributing the model updates to the
clients to accomplish an FL task, such as object detection
[35], while keeping training data secure and private.
• Decentralized FL (DFL): Unlike CFL, DFL is a network topology without any central server to coordinate
the training process. Instead, all clients are connected
together in a peer-to-peer (P2P) manner to perform AI
training, as shown in Fig. 4(b). In this way, in every
communication round, the clients also perform local
training based on their own dataset. Then, each client
implements model aggregation using the model updates
received from neighbor clients through the P2P com-

7

Local Training

Local Training

Client 1

Local Training

Global
Update

Client 2

Model
Update

Client 2

Central Server

Global Model
Client K

Local Training

Client 3

Client 3

Client 1

Local Training

Local Training

Client 4

Client K

Local Training

Local Training

(a) Centralized Federated Learning
(CFL)

P2P
Communication

Model
Exchange

Local Training

Client 4

Local Training

(b) Decentralized Federated Learning
(DFL)

Fig. 4: Types of FL models with networking structure.
munication to achieve a consensus on the global update
[36]. DFL is designed to fully or partially replace CFL
when the communication with the server is not available
or the network topology is highly scalable. Due to the
contemporary features, DFL can be integrated with P2Pbased communication technologies such as blockchain
[37] to build decentralized FL systems. Such that, the
DFL clients can communicate via blockchain ledgers
where model updates can be offloaded to the blockchain
for secure model exchange and aggregation [38]. In
the following sections, some DFL systems based on
blockchain will be explained in details.
B. Internet of Things
With its ubiquitous sensing and computing capabilities,
IoT is envisioned to connect a wide range of objects and
things to the network, aiming to facilitate customer services
and applications. To provide intelligence for IoT systems, AI
techniques such as ML and DL have been widely adopted in
IoT for enabling intelligent IoT systems [39] thanks to their
ability to discover knowledge of IoT data and get insights
for realizing different smart applications, e.g., human activity
classification, vehicular traffic control, weather prediction. In
the following, we analyze two key aspects of IoT networks,
namely IoT data analytics and intelligent service provision.
1) IoT Data Analytics: In IoT networks, AI techniques
can be integrated to build data analytic functions to process
data collected from ubiquitous IoT devices such as sensors,
actuators, smart phones, personal computers, and radio frequency identifications (RFIDs). ML/DL approaches such as
neural networks have advanced computational models with
multiple processing layers to learn the representations of data
from different levels of abstraction, which helps extract useful
features from natural data without requiring sophisticated
feature engineering and tuning. These features make them
attractive for handling different types of IoT data such as
different modalities (image, time-series, video and text) or big
data volume (data streaming from millions of sensing devices)

[39]. For example, a popular AI technique called Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) includes multiple links with neurons
that are connected together to create a directed graph which
allows RNNs to process data as temporal sequences of variable
lengths in data processing tasks. The details of popular AI
techniques used in data analytics can be found in our recent
survey [40].
2) Intelligent Service Provision: Based on intelligent data
analytics, AI can offer a number of IoT services. For example,
RNN can be used to predict traffic flow by using a graph
of a vehicular road network [41]. That is, the topology of
the road map is transformed into a spatio-temporal graph
to create a structural RNN, which then can capture spatiotemporal features of the traffic speed data in time-series forms
from sensors mounted on road segments. Another work in
[42] leverages a set of ML classifiers such as Bayes network,
random forest, and support vector machine (SVM) to provide
intelligent indoor localization based on data collected from capacitive sensors in room settings. Moreover, DL has been used
in [43] for human activity recognition. Here, an RNN model is
built to extract deep features from Wi-Fi signal data via offline
training that allows to remove redundancy information in raw
data. Then, a Long-short Term Memory (LSTM) architecture
is combined with RNN to provide further feature extraction for
better detection accuracy with low computational complexity.
Such representative use cases clearly demonstrate the great
potential of AI techniques in IoT networks. With the help
of FL, AI can achieve a much better level of scalability
and privacy preservation by coordinating multiple devices to
perform AI training at the edge of IoT networks while keeping
data safe and secure at local devices. This also opens the door
for newly emerging IoT services and applications which will
be explored in this paper.
C. Visions of the Use of FL in IoT
In traditional IoT systems [39], [40], AI functions are often
placed on data centers or cloud servers, which is obviously
not scalable to the exponential growth of IoT devices and the

8

high data distribution of large-scale IoT networks. Moreover,
given a massive amount of ubiquitous IoT datasets in the
big data era [4], it is infeasible to transmit a huge volume
of data over complex environments to the data center for AI
training. FL can provide more attractive features for enabling
distributed intelligent IoT services and applications by using
the computational capabilities of multiple IoT devices for data
training, as shown in Fig. 5. This new architecture not only
provides high quality of experiences for users in terms of
low communication latency and privacy protection, but also
benefits network operators such as channel bandwidth savings
and more efficient computing resources of network servers
for AI implementation. Indeed, FL has the great potential to
transform current IoT systems, with many newly emerging
services and applications. For example, the use of FL enables
distributed data learning by leveraging computational capabilities of IoT devices to achieve an common objective, such as
offloading latency minimization [44]. Each mobile device acts
as an FL client to train a local model and transmit the computed updates to an aggregator for overall model computation.
The federation of mobile devices helps eliminate the need for a
centralized data processing architecture, instead of performing
data training locally using their own dataset without degrading
learning performances and compromising user privacy values.
FL is also promising to enable other IoT services such as
attack detection or localization. For example, enabled by the
privacy enhancing features of FL, federated attack detection
and defense solutions can be realized using FL where each
IoT device joins to run an AI model, such as a DNN, in
order to train the threat model to fight against adversaries [45].
The cooperation of multiple devices accelerates the learning
process and improves learning accuracy while mitigating the
risks of attack on the model learning. Moreover, FL is integrated with a centralized indoor localization model [46] that
relieves fingerprint collection workload and reduces network
costs with privacy awareness, forming a decentralized indoor
localization scheme by using the computational capability of
distributed mobile devices. The usefulness of FL thus opens
new opportunities for emerging localization services, such as
localization in mobile indoor networks with global positioning
system, mobile target tracking and navigation.
In addition to that, FL is able to provide new directions
for enabling smart IoT applications, such as smart healthcare,
smart transportation, and smart city. In fact, FL has the potential to support smart healthcare and reshape the current intelligent healthcare systems by proving AI functions for supporting
healthcare services while enhancing user privacy and low
latency with the cooperation of multiple entities such as health
users and healthcare providers across medical institutions [47].
Furthermore, FL has been introduced to bring AI functions to
the network edge to empower smart transportation, involving
a number of participants, such as vehicles, to collaboratively
train globally shared AI models without the need for long data
transmission and compromising user privacy. Some possible
applications of FL in smart transportation can be vehicular
traffic planning and vehicular resource management. FL is also
a very useful solution to replace traditional centralized ML
approaches in traffic prediction tasks [10], [26] by running ML

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

IoT Devices
Local
Training

Smart phone

FL Server

Local
Training

Model
Aggregation

Smart watch
Local
Training

Smart meter
Local
Training

Smart camera

Fig. 5: A typical FL-IoT system.
models directly at the edge devices, e.g., vehicles, based on
their datasets such as road geometry, traffic flow and weather.
The use of massive data from multiple vehicles and the large
computational capability of all participant help provide better
traffic prediction outcomes, which cannot be achieved by
using centralized ML techniques with less dataset and limited
computation. FL has been exploited to provide distributed AI
functions for decentralized smart city applications such as
intelligent smart city data management [48]. In this context, FL
is helpful to structure data streams from ubiquitous IoT devices
that work as FL clients for performing local learning without
sharing their data to external third-parties. This would reshape
the current forms of smart cities by providing newly exiting
services such as smart urban communication, social economy
sharing, social activity monitoring, and interconnection of
global citizens.
In the following sections, we will present an extensive
survey on the use of FL for IoT services and applications
through different use cases. The roles and benefits of FL in
IoT systems are discussed in details, and some key lessons
obtained from the survey are also highlighted.
III. FL FOR I OT S ERVICES
In this section, we present a state-of-the-art survey on the
use of FL for IoT services, including IoT data sharing, data
offloading and caching, attack detection, localization, mobile
crowdsensing, and IoT privacy and security.
A. FL Serving as an Alternative to IoT Data Sharing
Data sharing is one of the key services in IoT, aiming to
transfer data over a shared network to serve end users in a
specific application. Instead of sharing the raw IoT data, FL
offers an alternative of sharing learning results to enable intelligent IoT networks with low latency and privacy preservation.

9

The work in [49] presents a collaborative data sharing model
for industrial IoT applications where data owners and data
requestors can achieve secure and fast data exchange among
decentralized multiple parties. Due to the resource constraints
of IoT users, an FL scheme is designed that enables the
estimation the types of data sharing requests with queries
submitted by a requester to return the correctly computed
results towards these queries for sharing. Moreover, to protect
the sharing process against external attacks, a blockchain [50]
is integrated with the FL architecture to build immutable data
blocks that are controlled by all parties for transparency and
improvement of data ownership without the need for any central authority. Once the sharing requests or data are recorded in
the blockchain, they cannot be modified or changed which thus
mitigate the risks of data leakage and improve network security
accordingly. Simulation results from real-time datasets confirm
the effectiveness of the proposed FL-based sharing scheme
with high learning accuracy and improved security. In line with
the discussion, the authors in [51] develop a federated tensor
mining framework in industrial IoT based on the FL concept
to integrate multisource data for enabling tensor-based mining
with security guarantees. More specifically, multiple factories
cooperate to join the tensor mining by sharing their data,
which have been encrypted using a homomorphic encryption
technique, with a centralized server. Such that, the server only
collects the ciphertext data and federates them into a tensor,
while raw data are kept at local factories, which thus protects
data privacy for the tensor mining. Although eavesdroppers
can attack the centralized server to compromise the aggregated
ciphertext and attackers can read ciphertext on communication
channels, they cannot get the key for data decryption. By using
two industrial alliances in Beijing and Shanghai with over 100
IoT nodes per factory for simulations, the proposed federated
model can be improved by 24% on mining accuracy compared
to the privacy-preserving compressive sensing method, and
provide high security degrees and efficient attack detection
without performance degradation.
FL has been applied to realize distributed data sharing in
vehicular networks. The research in [52] suggests an asynchronous federated data sharing framework for Internet of
Vehicles (IoV) where each vehicle acts as an FL client to
cooperatively share data with an aggregation server at a macro
BS (MBS). Vehicles with different service demands such as
traffic prediction or path selection can make a data sharing request to the MBS. By performing a shared global model based
on accumulated vehicular datasets, the MBS transforms the
sharing process into a computing task to solve sharing requests
of vehicles based on an actor-critic reinforcement learning
framework. This approach learns to analyze the behaviors of
participating nodes classified as bad or good nodes, aiming to
support the intelligent data sharing decision by selecting the
optimized participating nodes with sharing cost minimization.
To further improve security and reliability of the data sharing,
blockchain has been used that aims to verify the model
parameters and store them in immutable ledgers. The diagram
for such a data sharing scheme based on FL and blocckhain
is illustrated in Fig. 6. Moreover, an asynchronous FL scheme
for resource sharing in vehicular networks is also introduced

in [53]. Here, a local differential privacy mechanism that can
preserve the privacy of local updates, is integrated into gradient
descent training for enabling secure and robust FL sharing.
Particularly, to avoid high communication cost and reduce
security risks caused by the centralized FL architecture, a
decentralized FL model is designed that allows to aggregate
vehicles’ model updates at distributed MBSs. Experiments
from practical datasets show the promising results of the
proposed decentralized FL scheme with better accuracy and
privacy protection over traditional centralized FL approaches.
An FL scheme is also considered in [54] for knowledge
sharing in vehicular networks with hierarchical blockchain.
The proposed sharing architecture includes two main chain,
i.e., ground chains and a top chain. To be clear, ground chains
contain multiple vehicles as FL clients to implement local
learning using their own hardware and road side units (RSUs)
as decentralized FL aggregators that work in a blockchain
network to securely collect transactions within their coverage.
Meanwhile, the top chain maintains multiple RSUs that are
responsible for performing FL model computation. The FL
results are then appended into the block ledger for sharing
among RSU and vehicles for security and traceability.
Furthermore, to facilitate the data sharing of nonindependent and identically distributed (non-IID) among edge
devices, a HFL scheme is proposed in [55] for the shared
learning between edge devices as participants and a cloud
server as the aggregator. To deal with the issue of weight
divergence caused by traditional FL, a federated swapping
model is further developed based on a few shared data during
the HFL that can mitigate the adverse impact of non-IID data.
Also, a semisupervised learning scheme is adopted to predict
objects for video analysis applications among edge devices.
By using real-world video data, the proposed FL scheme can
achieve high accuracy in image classification, with an increase
of 3.8%, and the overall performance of object detection task
is improved by 1.1%, compared to the conventional FedAvg
algorithm. However, the reliance on a remote cloud for FL
operation can result in long communication latency. For this
problem, the authors in [56] suggest a cost-efficient optimization framework that can coordinate edge devices and cloud
by minimizing the communication latency. In this regard,
the scheduling of shared data and admission control along
with accuracy tuning are jointly optimized. The simulation
results verify the feasibility of the proposed algorithm with
reduced latency and privacy enhancement in various network
settings. Similarly, the study in [57] also considers an FL
scheme in a mobile IoT network consisting of cloud servers
and mobile devices as learning clients. The potential of FL
in mobile cloud is investigated via a video recommendation
system where each cloud collaboratively trains a local FL
algorithm enabled by a dual-convolutional probabilistic matrix
factorization model with user profile and textual information
of videos as non-IID datasets. By using computed local
updates, a federated recommendation algorithm is designed to
enable information fusion among clouds with communication
latency awareness. A drawback of this proposed scheme is
the lack of security protection design for cloud-based learning
in the FL process. To overcome this challenge, a secure

10

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

Primary Network

...

Critic_T Value

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Central Server

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Update

...

...

Actor_T Action
...

Critic_P Value

...

Target Network

Actor_P Action

...

...

...

...

...
...

...

Replay Memory

Federated Deep
Reinforcement
Learning

...

N-State

...

Reward

...

...

Action

...

State

...

...

...

Update

...

...

Update

...

Deep
Reinforcement
Learning

...

Aggregation

Global
Model

...

Update

...

Action

...

Update

...

State

Reward

...

...
...

Base Station

Base Station

Blockchain

Base Station

Blockchain

Base Station

Blockchain

Fig. 6: The architecture of federated learning-based data sharing for IoV with blockchain [52].
data collaboration framework is studied in [58] for federated
data learning among multiple parties, including public data
center and private data center, enabled by a blockchain ledger.
The data usage event and FL updates are offloaded to the
blockchain before transmitting to the central server for secure
aggregation, while the data control of users is ensured.
B. FL for the Optimization of IoT Data Offloading and
Caching
In addition to data sharing, FL has proved its strong ability
to facilitate IoT data offloading and caching services in many
applied domains.
1) FL-based Optimization for IoT Data Offloading: Recently, the role of FL in IoT data offloading has been investigated. For example, an FL-based data offloading scheme for
IoT networks is proposed in [59] based on deep reinforcement
learning (DRL). Such that, multiple IoT devices act as DRL
agents to build an intelligent offloading policy for offloading
cost minimization with respect to different task probabilities
via the FL concept. This solution not only enhances data
privacy due to the distribution of data learning in different
agents but also mitigates the burden posed on the IoT network
due to the centralized offloading architecture. Moreover, the
cooperation of IoT devices under the guidance of the FL
process is able to improve the overall training accuracy of
the learning model. Simulations from different offloading
task probabilities indicate an improvement in the offloading
performance in terms of high system utility and low task
transmission latency. The use of FL for edge data offloading is
also investigated in [44] where mobile devices collaboratively
learn a shared offloading model in edge computing. The key
objective is to maximize learning accuracy with respect to

offloading latency and energy consumption constraints. Each
FL client (or mobile device) acts as a local optimizer to solve
a Lagrangian Dual problem formulated to achieve optimal
offloading. Based on the proposed FL scheme, the offloading
performance can be improved in terms of better accuracy
compared to the heterogeneity-unaware equal task allocation
approach [60]. An FL-empowered task offloading problem
with mobile edge computing (MEC) has been also analyzed in
[61]. FL is combined with SVM to predict the user association
for minimizing energy costs spent on task computation and
transmission history. This can be done by using a learning
federation approach with FL which allows each mobile user to
learn an SVM model using its own dataset and then exchange
the local updates for computing a global model based on the
constraints of user association and task data size. As a result,
the cooperation of users helps the BS to determine the best
user association for offloading, aiming to reduce the energy
consumption with high learning accuracy.
In terms of video data offloading, the authors in [62] suggest
an FL-based solution for federated video analytics systems.
An MEC server is built as a controller to control the resize
rate by choosing different NNs to adjust the size of frames
offloaded in the network. Then, edge devices and the MEC
server join to learn an FL algorithm to guide the video
offloading process across the edge network in a fashion the
learning accuracy is ensured while the offloading latency is
minimized. Meanwhile, an offloading scheme for vehicular
networks with FL is recently considered in [63]. Due to the
user privacy concerns raised by the direct data offloading, FL
has been used to build a cooperative learning architecture in
which vehicles and RSUs can share a common learning model.
This advanced approach potentially reduces learning costs with

11

respect to agent selection and data sharing in task offloading.
Recently, FL is leveraged in [64] to characterize an offloading
solution for data processing tasks in fog computing networks.
By using FL, each mobile device can perform locally model
learning for offloading optimization with respect to resource
limitations and model accuracy without sharing raw data with
the fog server for privacy protection. In particular, mobile
devices can exchange their model updates together to minimize
their model errors and adjust learning rates in a way the
learning cost is optimized. By simulating with MNIST datasets
consisting of thousands of images, the proposed FL-based
offloading scheme can improve network resource utilization
without sacrificing the learning accuracy of local models.
2) FL-based Optimization for IoT Data Caching: IoT data
offloaded from mobile devices can be cached by edge servers
[65] where FL can play an important role in establishing
intelligent caching policies, in order to cope with the explosive
growth of mobile data in modern IoT networks. The use of
FL can help overcome the challenges faced by traditional
learning approaches in terms of high privacy concerns since
data users may not trust the third-party server and thus hesitate
to offload their private data for caching. As shown in [66],
FL is very useful to build proactive data caching schemes in
edge computing without the need for direct access to user
data to predict the most popular files for caching. By using
the FL concept, mobile users can download the NN model
from a cache entity, such as an edge server, for local training
before sending back the model to the server for aggregation in
an iterative manner. This enables data file recommendation at
the server based on the similarity of users and the files using
latent features. Compared to baseline methods such as Oracle
(Future caching demands are known in advance), random
(random content selection) and Thompson Sampling (win
and loss-based selection), the FL-enabled scheme achieves
a better caching efficiency with increasing cache size and
communication rounds. FL is also adopted in [67] to train
DRL agents to manage communication and computation usage
in MEC systems for task offloading and content caching
at MEC servers. By using FL, user equipments (UEs) do
not need to offload their data to the MEC servers; instead,
they train the DRL model at local devices and only submit
the model parameters to the server. This learning solution
aims for privacy protection and spectrum resource savings
as well as ensures the robustness of the learning due to less
impacts on unbalanced data and poor communication at any
learning client. The role of FL in supporting DRL training for
content replacement in data caching is also verified in [68] in
which UEs can cooperatively learn a shared model and keep
raw data local, while the cloud at a BS can learn a global
model by averaging local updates. Particularly, the content
replacement can be formulated as a Markov decision process
that is cooperatively solved by UEs via the FL process.
To estimate the content caching placement at terrestrial BSs
in UAV-based 6G networks, a 2-stage FL algorithm is designed
in [69] among mobile users, UAVs/BSs, and a heterogeneous
computing platform. In the FL architectures, each mobile
user holds a deep neural network (DNN) model that contains
shallow and dense layers. The parameters of shallow layers

help learn the general features of content access, while the
parameters of dense layers support the learning of specific
content features and user context information. As a result, the
global updates at the BSs can achieve a better insight of data
traffic flow for improving caching performances. Two realword datasets including 100,000 ratings on 1682 movies from
943 users and over a million ratings on 3883 movies from 6040
users are employed to evaluate the FL algorithm, showing
a better caching efficiency with improved learning accuracy.
Recently, FL is integrated with blockchain to build secure
learning schemes for content caching in edge computing [70].
Smart contracts [71], a kind of self-executing program running
on the blockchain, are employed to perform access verification
and credit investigation during the content offloading and
caching at the edge servers. Then, IoT devices participate
in the local training using their own datasets to learn the
features of users and files, and share the gradient updates
to the edge server for popular file estimation, aiming to
improve the overall cache hit rate. By compressing gradients
at the local devices, the proposed scheme can further reduce
communication overhead during the FL process. Simulations
from MovieLens datasets confirm a significant improvement
of caching efficiency over the traditional FL-based caching
algorithms. Meanwhile, the authors in [72], [73] pay attention
to content popularity prediction with FL. In fact, the popularity
prediction of proactive edge caching at BSs can mitigate the
traffic load and enhance user experience, by selecting the
most popular and important contents in the offloaded data
package. FL comes as a viable solution to estimate the file
popularity without disclosing sensitive user information and
user preference. In this context, a NN can be used to train
the preference-weighted file popularity at local devices using
historic request records, aiming to enhance the cache hit rate.
By using FL, local updates can be averaged at a global edge
server to predict popular files to be cached to balance the data
usage experience of all pariticipants.
C. FL for IoT Attack Detection
The popularity of IoT applications and services has become
the main targets of malicious adversaries that can attack
AI/ML models integrated in IoT networks, by modifying data
inputs or changing learning network weights which can lead
to erroneous predicted outputs [74]. Many solutions have been
proposed to cope with attacks in IoT such as ensemble diversity or adversarial training [75], but they are mostly applied to
a specific type of attack and not scale well to distributed IoT
networks. FL has emerged as a strong alternative to provided
distributed intelligence for IoT systems with the ability to
detect a wide range of attacks and support network defense
solutions [45]. Enabled by the privacy enhancement feature
of FL, a federated attack detection and defense solution is
built in a fashion that each industrial IoT device joins to run
a DNN model locally, in order to retrain the threat model to
fight against adversaries. In this process (as shown in Fig. 7),
each IoT device first produces adversarial samples to create a
retraining set; then, the local trained updates are offloaded to
a cloud server for synchronization. Finally, the cloud server

12

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

Cloud Server
Aggregation

...

...

.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

...

Attack
scheme

Attack
scheme

Attack
scheme

...

...

Gradient

...

Device K

Update
.
.
.

Gradient

.
.
.

Device 2

.
.
.

Gradient
.
.
.

Device 1

...

Attack Monitor

Old Model

Federated Defense

Attack Library

New Model

Gradient Update
Attack Scheme Assignment

..
.
..
.

Device 2

..
.

Model

..
.

..
.

Adversarial
Samples

..
.

Retrain

..
.

Device 1

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

Model

...

..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

Adversarial
Samples

Natural
Samples
..
.

Retrain

..
.

..
.

..
.

Retrain

..
.

Natural
Samples

..
.

Natural
Samples

Adversarial
Samples

Model
Device K

Fig. 7: Federated attack detection and defense in FL-based IoT networks.
computes a global model and then sends back to the local
devices for the next round of learning. The cooperation of multiple devices accelerates the learning process and improves the
detection of adversaries while mitigating the risks of attack on
the model learning. In such a distributed learning environment,
to ensure robust and safe FL operations, developing attack
detection inside the FL architecture is essentially important.
An attack detection approach is proposed in [76] for robust
and safe FL process. To be clear, a stochastic dynamical
system is designed to evaluate the aggregated parameters in
each FL round by using derive explicit conditions that prevent
attacks from interfering the FL process at the aggregator. This
work motivates more innovative solutions for attack detection
and prevention for the FL, such as in [77]. Here, a spectral
anomaly detection mechanism is built at the global server to
identify abnormal updates by verifying their low-dimensional
embeddings to remove noise and potentally malicious samples
while remaining useful data features. In practical leaning
scenarios, clients such as IoT devices may be malicious ones
and be curious about the model updates of other users at the
global server. In this regard, the recognition and detection
of malicious nodes are of paramount importance for safe
FL [78]. A solution using a pre-trained anomaly detection
model is necessary to identify abnormal behaviors of clients
in each communication round, by producing the surrogates
of the local model weight updates at the global server. As
a result, malicious clients and attacks can be detected and
eliminated from the FL process while the federated model is
preserved [79]. In addition to that, FL models can also be used
to automatically detect adversarial clients in wireless networks,
such as IoTs [80]. Particularly, a dynamic linguistic quantifier
is designed at the aggregation server to evaluate the weight
contribution of each client in order to filter out adversarial
clients and detect attacks such as model update poisoning
attacks, data poisoning attacks, and evasion attacks.

Moreover, FL also facilitates the detection of compromised
IoT devices in federated IoT networks. In fact, with the
sophistication of attacks and threats, it is challenging to
detect them with current solutions [81] that often recognize
attacks by making deviations from normal behaviour profiles
of users, which suffers from high false alarm rate and long
detection delay. Moreover, IoT data are highly distributed over
the large-scale network and each IoT device often has low
computing power to run a detection algorithm. To overcome
these challenges, FL comes as a natural solution to perform
attack detection algorithms for distributed IoT networks [82].
Each IoT device can submit a detection profile obtained
by local training to a security gateway where local updates
are aggregated to build a common detection model for the
IoT network. The involvement of a large number of IoT
devices with diverse features and massive datasets enhances
the learning accuracy for better attack detection efficiency.
Experiments with Mirai malware on a testbed confirm a high
detection rate with 95.6% with low learning time, compared to
the centralized learning approach at an IoT server. Another FLbased attack detection scheme is also considered in [83] where
smart filters are built at IoT gateways to identity and prevent
cyberattacks in industry 4.0. More specifically, each filter is
built based on a DNN that trains local datasets collected from
its subnetwork such as a smart farming or an energy plant. The
trained model updates are then averaged at a central server to
perform a detection algorithm. By integrating massive updates
from multiple IoT gateway, the server can generate a high
learning accuracy rate without compromising user privacy and
saving network channel spectrum resources. FL has been also
used to support federated intrusion detection in IoT [84] for
replacing traditionally centralized learning-based approaches.
An important issue of designing intrusion detection systems
is quick detection while user information is protected. FL can
meet this requirement by distributing AI/ML models to the

13

local devices and using the computational capability of all
clients such as routers for building a strong attack defense
mechanism for better detection rate. To improve the scalability
of intrusion detection, a line-speed and scalable FL approach
is introduced in [85]. Each IoT device runs a binarized NN
for packet classification at the line speed of nearby switches
in a scalable manner, while preserving privacy of network
traces. Interestingly, FL can be deployed on mobile devices
such as Android phones for malware detection [86]. A safe
semi-supervised ML algorithm is integrated at each Android
phone that cooperatively contacts with other phones to build a
shared malware classification algorithm at a data server. The
results obtained from simulations show a high accuracy of
malware app detection without false alarms.
D. FL for IoT Localization
The proliferation of smart devices enables a wide range
of location-based services which often rely on localization
systems. Wireless signals and channel state information (CSI)
can be employed to determine the preferred reference locations
of the target object. Traditional AI/ML-based localization
systems often suffer from the lack of robustness due to the
dynamics of mobile environments and privacy leakage bottlenecks caused by the centralized data processing architecture
for object localization [87]. FL can provide interesting solutions for enabling efficient and privacy-preserved localization
services. As an example, FL is used in [88] to build a privacypreserving indoor localization model in residential building
settings. Mobile users can build their AI models locally by
using received signal strength measurements from beacons
with labelled locations, while the central server builds a global
multilayer perceptron model from local updates for accurate
localization estimation. By using available RSS data from
UJIIndoorLoc database [89], a simulation is performed for the
proposed FL scheme, showing a significant improvement in the
localization accuracy while privacy is preserved in different
indoor settings. The potential of FL in indoor localization
services is also verified in [46] to solve the issues of repetitive
task learning and privacy leakage risks due to the reliance of a
central AI server. In the proposed architecture, FL is integrated
with a centralized indoor localization model that relieves
fingerprint collection workload and reduce network costs with
privacy awareness, forming a decentralized indoor localization
scheme by using the computational capability of distributed
mobile devices. Each device runs a deep learning model using
labeled fingerprint data and unlabeled crowdsourced data and
then exchanges the computed updates with a central server
for building a global statistical localization model. The use
of FL clearly shows a better performance in terms of lower
communication cost, privacy protection, and robustness in
various fingerprint data distribution settings.
Another work in [90] also leverages FL to build a federated
localization scheme for WiFi networks. By using WiFi signals
that represents predefined reference locations, mobile devices
can build their local fingerprints to run a DNN model followed
by a deep autoencoder for noise removal. Then, the local
weights are combined by a central server to generate a general

model. Besides, to protect the communication channel during
the offloading phase, a homomorphic encryption technique is
adopted to encrypt local updates. An experiment is conduced
in a laboratory corridor setting, indicating a high localization
estimation accuracy with high security. Similarly, a Federated
Localization (FedLoc) framework is considered in [91] for
providing accurate localization services in IoT networks. By
cooperating multiple users in the model learning using local
fingerprint data, FL minimizes the bias of location estimation
with privacy protections. The usefulness of FL opens new
opportunities for emerging localization services, such as localization in mobile indoor networks with global positioning
system (GPS), mobile target tracking and navigation based on
inertial sensors, and wireless traffic prediction with BSs.
E. FL for IoT Mobile Crowdsensing
With the development of IoT, mobile crowdsensing is
designed to take advantage of pervasive mobile devices for
sensing and collecting data from physical environments to
serve end users. In intelligent mobile crowdsensing systems,
traditional AI/ML architectures have been deployed for model
training and processing [92]. However, these traditional crowdsensing solutions usually require direct access to user data,
which leaves a chance for privacy leakage. Moreover, the
use of a central server to handle all sensing data is not a
scalable solution, making it hard to cope with the massive
volume of data from ubiquitous IoT devices. FL would be
a very promising tool to accelerate the learning and training
for crowdsensing models. In fact, FL has been used in recent
works with encouraging results. For example, FL is used to
support automatic content suggestions for on-device keyboards
[93], by sensing and suggesting relevant contents, e.g., search
queries, based on input texts from a network of smartphones.
The feasibility of FL has been tested in Gboard on Android
phones where each phone runs a query suggestion model based
on local on-device information and collaborates with a cloud
server. By using a SGD-based optimization model, the cloud
can train the text prediction model to generate a suggested
query when a user types on the phone. The study in [94] shows
an FL-based mobile crowdsensing scheme, with a focus on
privacy-preserving XGBoost training with the cooperation of
multiple mobile users. A secure gradient aggregation algorithm
is designed by integrating homomorphic encryption with secret
sharing, which prevents the central server from guessing
decryption result before operating aggregation. Simulations
MNIST datasets reveal very competitive results, with high
accuracy rate (over 98%), and a reduction of 23.9% runtime
and 33.3% communication latency for gradient aggregation.
Similarly, a security mechanism is proposed in [95] along
with FL for secure XGBoost training in mobile crowdsensing
with cloud computing. The FL model takes three main entities
into account building the federated system, including users,
edge servers and cloud. Here, users run classification and
regression tree models at local devices and then offload the
computed updates to the cloud for averaging protected by a
security protocol built on the edge layer. Given a crowdsourcing/crowdsensing system, the work in [96] focuses on designing an incentive mechanism [97] by analyzing the interactions

14

between the participating clients and the aggregator at an edge
server to minimize learning costs. To be clear, each client
selects a learning strategy for solving its local sub-problem
to ensure desired accuracy with lowest participation costs,
while the central server builds a utility function by averaging
local updates to offer reward to the clients. This incentive
process is modelled by a two-stage Stackelberg game that can
outperform the heuristic approach in terms of a utility gain
improvement by 22% for different system settings. The game
theoretic approach is also adopted in [98] for the FL-based
crowdsensing in IoT networks. MEC servers, cloud and IoT
sensors cooperatively join to build a shared learning model
in a fashion the utility of MEC operators is maximized by
considering a tradeoff between the revenue and energy cost
via a Stackelberg equilibrium formulation.
In traditional FL systems, the reliance on a central server
for aggregation can result in high communication overhead
and less robustness due to the heterogeneity of different IoT
devices. The authors in [99] solve these problems by providing
a distributed FL framework in a sensing platform for distributed decision making and learning among IoT devices. To
mitigate latency incurred by the central server communication,
an infusing redundancy solution is considered to speed up
distributed stochastic gradient descent calculation based on
a distributed of datasets. In this way, each IoT node only
needs to compute the model based on its mini-batch instead
of the whole datasets, which will reduce computation latency
accordingly. Recently, FL is also employed to build a secure
UAV-based crowdsensing approach [100], as shown in Fig. 8.
Instead of relying on a central aggregator, blockchain is
introduced to decentralize the learning process by integrating
UAVs with task publishers with a blockchain ledger that make
the data training and contribution verification among UAVs
secure and transparent. To further improve privacy for the
local learning updates, a local differential privacy technique
is adopted in communication rounds with aggregate accuracy
guarantees. Based on that, an incentive mechanism is also
built to evaluate the efficiency of the interactions between
publishers and UAVs. Experiment results from a MNIST
dataset including 60,000 training samples and 10,000 test
samples with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as the
learning model at UAVs show a high utility of UAVs and low
aggregation error along with low convergence latency.
F. FL-based Techniques for Privacy and Security in IoT
Services and Networks
In IoT networks, security and privacy remain huge issues
for IoT devices, which introduce a whole new degree of
attacks and privacy concerns for consumers. This is because
these devices not only collect personal information but can
also monitor user activities. Many AI/ML algorithms have
been adopted to address security and privacy issues, by their
ability to classify and detect threats and privacy bottlenecks
in IoT networks. However, these traditional solutions also
have several limitations, including the need for centralized
IoT data collection and user privacy exposure due to public
data sharing. FL appears as an attractive approach for enabling

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

UAV

UAV

Local Model

Model
download

UAV

Local Model

Model
upload

Model
download

Model
upload

Local Model

Model
download

Model
upload

Blockchain
Broadcast global
updates to
blockchain

Download local
models from
blockchain

Broadcast global
updates to
blockchain

Global Model

Global Model

Task request

Task
Publisher

MEC server

MEC server

Fig. 8: Federated learning for blockchain-based crowdsensing
in UAV networks.
intelligent privacy and security services in IoT networks. For
example, FL has been used for data privacy preservation
in vehicular IoT networks [101] where two-phase mitigating scheme is proposed for intelligent data transformation
and collaborative data leakage detection. Different from the
existing schemes, the proposed vehicular FL solution allows
participants (e.g., vehicles) to train models locally with their
own data without a centralized curator, which contributes
significantly to protecting their data privacy. Moreover, a joint
mapping approach is performed over multiple vehicles to
ensure the utility of data after the transformation, allowing for
mapping raw data of multiple parties into learned data models.
The learned model contains valid information to be further
used in tasks such as resource allocation without revealing
their raw data, which further enhances privacy protection. Similarly, to avoid the privacy threat to vehicular IoT networks, a
new approach is suggested in [102] using FL combined with
local differential privacy which aims for perturbing gradients
generated by vehicles while not compromising the utility
of gradients. This would prevent attackers from deducing
original data even though they obtain perturbed gradients. As
a result, the FL server gathers and averages users’ submitted
perturbed gradients to obtain the average d result to update
the global model’s parameters without privacy concerns. In
FL-IoT systems, a centralized entity is often used to perform
model aggregation which introduces single-point failures and
privacy concerns due to the curious server. Blockchain [37] can
be used to address this issue, aiming to replace the centralized
aggregator in the traditional FL system [103]. A consortium
blockchain is used to store FL model updatess permanently.
More specifically, a manufacturer first uploads an initial model
to the blockchain so that customers can send requests to obtain
that model. After training models locally, customers upload
their locally trained models to the blockchain and a hash will
be sent to the blockchain as a transaction. The hash can be used
to retrieve the actual data from blockchain storage. The leader

15

and miners are responsible for confirming transactions and
calculating the averaged model parameters to obtain a global
model. To protect privacy of customers and improve the test
accuracy, the scheme also enforces differential privacy on the
extracted features for providing a new level of privacy for FL
training.
Moreover, FL has been applied to protect security in IoT
services and networks. For instance, the work in [104] considers an NN-based FL scheme for network anomaly detection
such that the participants do not share their training data
to a third party, which can prevent the training data from
being exploited by attackers. A multi-task learning method is
proposed by using a distributed DNN which can perform the
network anomaly detection task, traffic recognition task, and
traffic classification task simultaneously. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of FL in detecting network
anomalies, achieving an accuracy of 97.81% and closeness to
the centralized scheme. In the current FL-IoT systems, clients
are autonomous in that their behaviors are not fully governed
by the aggregator. As a result, a client may intentionally or
unintentionally deviate from the prescribed course of federated
model training, which leads to abnormal behaviors, such as
turning into a malicious attacker or a malfunctioning client.
An FL-based approach is studied in [105] where security is
analyzed, aiming to detect anomalous clients at the server side
by using low-dimensional surrogates of model weight vectors
for anomaly detection. Recently, blockchain is also integrated
into FL to solve security issues in fog-based IoT networks
[106]. With hybrid identity generation, comprehensive verification, and access control offered by decentralized blockchain,
FL model updates are transmitted safely over the distributed
fog network in an immutable manner. Also, the mining process
performed by the miners allows for robust authentication on
user access during the training against malicious threats and
learning data breaches.
In summary, we list FL-IoT services in the taxonomy
Table III and Table IV to summarize the technical aspects as
well as the key contributions and limitations of each reference
work.
IV. FL FOR I OT A PPLICATIONS
Enabled by the roles and benefits of FL in IoT services as
presented in the previous section, here we provide an extensive
discussion of the integration of FL into a wide range of key IoT
applications, including smart healthcare, smart transportation,
UAVs, smart city, and smart industry along with applied use
case domains, as summarized in Fig. 9.
A. FL for Smart Healthcare
In smart healthcare, AI-based approaches have been extensively adopted to learn health data to facilitate healthcare
services, e.g., intelligent imaging for disease detection [107].
A key issue in such a traditional AI model is the privacy
concern caused by the public data sharing with the cloud or
the data centre for data training [108]. Indeed, compared to
other domains, data in healthcare systems are highly sensitive
subject to health regulations such as United States Health

Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) [109].
The removal of metadata such as patient information is insufficient to preserve privacy of patients, especially in the complex
healthcare settings where multiple parties such as hospitals and
insurance companies have access to healthcare database as a
part of the employment requirements, including data analysis
and processing. Obviously, the use of traditional AI methods
with the reliance on a central server for analytics is not an
ideal solution for modern healthcare. FL can offer alternative
solutions by providing intelligence with privacy awareness,
where the data sharing is not needed [47]. Recent works
have demonstrated the practicality of FL in smart healthcare
sector with advanced features. Here, we focus on analyzing
the roles of FL in healthcare with two use cases, including
EHRs management and healthcare cooperation.
1) FL for Electronic Health Records (EHRs) Management:
Some research efforts have been devoted to the use of FL for
enabling flexible and privacy-preserving EHRs management
in healthcare operations. For instance, a collaborative learning
protocol based on FL is introduced in [110] for an EHRs
system with the cooperation of multiple hospital institutions
and a cloud server. Here, each hospital runs a NN using its
own EHRs with the help of cloud server. To ensure privacy
for model parameters in the FL process, a lightweight data
perturbation method is considered to perturb the trainingrelated data, which thus can defend model memorization
attack in the learning. Although attackers can obtain perturbed
information of EHRs, it is hard to obtain or recover the original
data. Simulations on AlexNet NN with standard CIFAR-10
dataset verify a good performance in terms of prediction
accuracy and security levels for EHRs learning. The authors
in [111] also build a federated NN training framework that
allows each hospital participates in learning part of the model
using its EHRs data source. An eICU collaborative research
database collected from 58 hospitals comprising 1,264,89 ICU
admissions is used to evaluate the proposed FL algorithm
in terms of the prediction rate of patient mortality during
the ICU admission. To save network resources spent by the
communication to the central server in EHRs learning, the
study in [112] introduces a fully decentralized FL approach
by combining classic non-convex decentralized optimization
and decentralized stochastic gradient tracking. Each hospital
runs a learning model locally to extract patients features from
real-world datasets (i.e., proprietary clinical dataset including
7919 patients diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment) by
using a decentralized stochastic gradient algorithm combined
with a linear speedup technique to accelerate the convergence
rate. Although FL enables distributed learning without sharing
EHRs, model updates still remain privacy leakage due to
inference attacks on the communication channel. To overcome
this challenge, differential privacy techniques can be useful to
improve privacy protection for FL-based EHRs learning [113].
By using an objective perturbation method which adds noise to
the objective function at local models, we can acquire a differentially private approximation that produces a minimizer of the
perturbed objective. Several simulations have been tested with
using AI models such as gradient descent, namely perceptron,
SVM, showing that the proposed approach can offer strong

16

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

TABLE III: Taxonomy of FL-IoT services.
Issue

Ref.

FL
type
CFL

ML
type
NN

FL
clients
IoT users

FL aggregator
Data
center

CFL

-

Factories

Data
center

DFL

DRL

Vehicles

MBSs

DFL

Decision
tree

Vehicles

MBSs

DFL

CNN

Vehicles

RSUs

HFL

CNN

[55]

Vehicular
knowledge
sharing
IoT video
data sharing

Edge
devices

Cloud
server

IoT video
data sharing

CFL

CNN

Cloud

Cloud

[57]

HFL

DRL

VFL

-

[44]

IoT data
offloading
Edge data
offloading

Mobile
devices
Mobile
devices

Edge
server
Edge
server

Edge data
offloading

HFL

SVM

Mobile
devices

BS

[61]

Video data
offloading

HFL

DNN

[62]

Mobile
devices

MEC
server

An video data offloading scheme
with FL in edge networks.

DFL

-

Vehicles

RSUs

A federated task offloading in
vehicular networks with FL.

HFL

CNN

VFL

-

Mobile
devices
Mobile
devices

Fog server

[66]

Vehicular
data
offloading
Fog data
offloading
Edge data
caching

Edge
server

A data processing task offloading
scheme with FL.
A proactive content caching with
FL in MEC.

Edge data
caching

CFL

DRL

[67]

Edge/cloud
server

An edge caching scheme with
DRL and FL.

Edge content
caching

DFL

Transfer
learning

BSs

[69]

User
equipments
Mobile
users

Edge content
caching

DFL

-

[70]

IoT
devices

Edge
servers

Edge content
caching

CFL

-

Mobile
users

BS

[72]

An edge content caching
framework in UAV-based 6G
networks.
An edge content caching
framework for IoT networks with
blockchain.
An edge content popularity
prediction model with FL.

[49]

FL for IoT Data Sharing

[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]

FL for IoT Data Offloading and Caching

[59]

[63]
[64]

Use case
Industrial
IoT data
sharing
Industrial
IoT data
sharing
Vehicular
data sharing
Vehicular
data sharing

Smart Healthcare

Smart
Transportation

Key contributions

Limitations

A privacy-preserved data sharing
scheme for industrial IoT with FL
and blockhain.
A secure FL-based data sharing
scheme for tensor mining in
factories.
A secure asynchronous FL-based
data sharing model for IoV.
A differential privacy-based FL
model for secure vehicular data
sharing.
A hierarchical blockchain-based
FL scheme for vehicular
knowledge sharing.
A sharing scheme for non-IID
data among edge devices and
cloud.
An FL scheme for video
recommunication and sharing in
mobile cloud.
An FL scheme for cooperative
IoT data task offloading.
An FL framework for federated
data offloading in mobile edge
networks.
An FL-empowered task offloading
in MEC.

Communication cost for such a
CFL is high.

UAVs

Smart City

The latency performance for the
federated mining has not been
evaluated.
Security performance has not been
investigated.
Numerical evaluations of security
for FL-based sharing have not
been implemented.
The impact of bloclchain
consensus on FL sharing has not
been analyzed.
The latency for cloud
communication is high.
Security risks from cloud-based
learning has not been investigated.
Learning accuracy of FL-based
offloading has not been analyzed.
The proposed FL scheme is
simple and not scalable to
multi-edge networks.
The feasibility of the proposed
model in practical settings has not
been investigated.
The proposed offloading model is
only applied to a specific
application.
Data privacy should be considered
in the task offloading.
The built FL algorithm suffers
from slow learning convergence.
Communication cost for FL
implementation has not been
discussed.
Scalability of the proposed FL
scheme has not been verified.
Security and privacy performances
have not been evaluated.
Blockchain cost from consensus
running in FL has not been
considered.
The proposed model is not
scalable with more edge
servers/BSs.

Smart Industry

EHRs Management

Vehicular Traffic
Planning

UAV
Communications

Data Management

Robotics and
Industry 4.0

Healthcare
Cooperation

Vehicular Resource
Management

UAV Network
Management

Smart Grid

Efficient FL for
Industrial Edgebased IoT

Fig. 9: FL-IoT application domains.

17

TABLE IV: Taxonomy of FL-IoT services (continued).

FL for IoT Mobile Crowdsensing

FL for IoT Localization

FL for IoT Attack Detection

Issue

Ref.

Use case

FL
clients
IoT
devices

FL aggregator
Cloud
server

[45]

Attack
defense

VFL

Adversarial
ML
NN

IoT
devices
IoT
gateways

Security
gateway
Data
center

CFL

DNN

Routers

CFL

-

[85]

Intrusion
detection
Intrusion
detection

IoT
devices

Data
center
Cloud
server

An FL-based approach for attack
detection in IoT.
An FL-enabled scheme for
federated attack detection in
Industry 4.0.
An intrusion detection mechanism
with FL for IoT networks.
An FL model for scalable
intrusion detection in IoT.

Malware
detection

CFL

[86]

Random
forest

Android
devices

Data
center

An FL-based solution for malware
detection in Android apps.

CFL

NN

CFL

-

Mobile
users
Mobile
users

Data server

[46]

Indoor
localization
Indoor
localization

An FL-based localization scheme
for building scenarios.
An FL-based localization scheme
for mobile crowdsourcing.

Indoor
localization

CFL

DNN

WiFI
devices

Data server

[90]

A scheme for indoor localization
with FL in WiFi networks.

Indoor
localization

CFL

DNN

Mobile
devices

Data server

[91]

A federated localization (FedLoc)
model for mobile localization.

HFL

Regression
tree

Mobile
devices

Data server

HFL

Regression
tree

Mobile
devices

VFL

-

DFL

[102]

Mobile
crowdsensing
Mobile
crowdsensing
Mobile
crowdsensing
Mobile
crowdsensing
Mobile
sensing
Mobile
crowdsensing
IoT privacy
preservation
IoT privacy
preservation

[103]

[82]
[83]
[84]

[88]

[94]
[95]
[96]
[98]
[99]

FL for IoT Privacy and Security

[100]

[101]

[104]
[106]

FL
type
VFL

ML type

Key contributions

Limitations

A federated attack defense scheme
in industrial IoT networks.

A secure FL model for mobile
crowdsensing.

Communication latency during the
FL process with cloud has not
been considered.
Data privacy has not been
investigated.
Scalability in contexts of Industry
4.0 for the built FL scheme has
not been considered.
The considered FL model is still
simple.
The comparison between ML and
DL-based approaches in FL
process is missing.
The performance of learning
convergence has not been
presented.
Attack analysis has not been
provided.
The feasibility of the proposed
model has not been investigated
on real localization systems.
Performances on FL convergence
and learning latency have not
been provided.
Security for mobile FL-based
localization has not been
considered.
Scalability of the proposed
scheme has not been investigated.

Attack
detection
Attack
detection

HFL

Cloud
server

An FL-based architecture for
mobile crowdsensing.

Communication with cloud for FL
training is high.

Mobile
users

Edge
server

An FL-based scheme for federated
crowdsensing with incentive.

Scalability and latency
performances should be given.

-

IoT
sensors

MEC
servers

An FL-based crowdsensing with
incentive in MEC.

Only utility simulations are given.

DFL

-

DFL

RL

IoT
devices
UAVs

Cloud
servers
Task
publishers

The given model is simple and
hard to apply for other scenarios.
Impacts of blockchain consensus
have not been evaluated.

VFL

-

Vehicles

HFL

DNN

Vehicles

Data
centre
Cloud
server

IoT privacy
preservation

DFL

NN

Mobile
users

Companies

A distributed FL solution for
mobile sensing in IoT.
A blockchain-based FL scheme
for mobile sensing in UAV
networks.
An FL-based scheme for privacy
preservation in vehicular IoT.
An FL-differential privacy-based
scheme for privacy enhancement
in vehicular IoT.
A blockchained FL scheme for
crowdsourcing systems.

IoT anomaly
detection
IoT security
protection

HFL

DNN

DFL

CNN

Mobile
users
Mobile
users

Edge
server
Mobile
users

DNN

Data server

privacy levels while ensuring high training performance.
The potential of FL has been investigated in solving distributed binary supervised classification problems to estimate
hospitalizations for cardiac events [114]. Here, each data
holder, such as a mobile user with smartphone, runs a SVM
model using EHRs datasets featured by age, gender, and race
and physical characteristics, and then exchanges the computed
updates with an aggregator for building a global hospitalization
prediction model. The proposed solution has the potential
to support prediction of the progression of several popular

A multi-task FL scheme for IoT
anomaly detection.
A blockchain-FL scheme for
security enhancement in fog IoT.

Convergence performance has not
been validated.
Communication latency during the
FL process with cloud has not
been considered.
The impact of blockchain mining
on FL training has not been
verified.
The implementation is simple
without detailed experiments.
The joint learning and mining
energy allocation should be
considered.

diseases with cardiovascular conditions. FL is also applied
to predict adverse drug reactions (ADR) on EHRs data to
solve issues of data shortage in a single site for rare ADR
detection [115]. Each medical site performs an AI model
such as SVM, single-layer perceptron, and logistic regression,
and contributes to the computation of a global model by
using its sensitive and imbalanced real-world EHRs data.
Experiments for two use cases, namely prediction of chronic
opioid usage and prediction of extrapyramidal symptoms for
patients, are implemented. Compared to the centralized AI

18

approaches, FL offers a similar accuracy performance in predicting ADR without sacrificing user data privacy. To further
improve the accuracy rate and accelerate the convergence
speed for FL in EHRs learning, the authors in [116] suggest
to remove irrelevant updates while exploring the relevance
of local updates using a sign method at each EHRs owner
in the FL architecture consisting of secret providers, EHRs
owners, and a central server. Further, security and privacy are
also considered in [117] for an FL-based medical imaging
processing architecture. Here, hospitals, healthcare providers
and patients cooperatively train a secure FL model with the
support of differential privacy to build a secure multi-party
computation model for image analytics by an algorithm owner
at a medical center.
2) FL for Healthcare Cooperation: In addition, FL with its
distributed and privacy-preserved nature can promote secure
healthcare cooperation for better medical service delivery. The
study in [118] presents a cooperative healthcare framework
enabled by FL among medical IoT devices. Each device joins
to run a NN using electrocardiogram datasets to build an
arrhythmia detection model at a powerful server. Compared to
the FedAvg algorithm, the proposed FL scheme tested on 64
IoT devices can achieve a lower communication overhead with
a small accuracy loss in a practical arrhythmia detection task.
Meanwhile, in order to solve issues caused by device, data, and
model heterogeneity that can adversely affect the FL process,
a new personalized FL solution is proposed in [119] for cloudedge-based healthcare. In this case, personalization learning is
performed at local devices to mitigate heterogeneities while
attaining high-quality personalized models. Enabled by FLbased optimization for data offloading as presented in subsection III-B, a federated offloading scheme is designed for mobile healthcare. That is, each IoT device can choose to offload
its computationally intensive tasks to edge gateways which
execute the learning models before sending the updates to the
cloud for combination. This realizes a cooperative network of
cloud, edge, and IoT devices for healthcare applications with
the help of differential privacy and homomorphic encryption
techniques for security improvement. To promote the federation of wearable devices in supporting healthcare, a transfer
learning framework called FedHealth is studied in [120] for
wearable healthcare with the help of FL. FedHealth allows to
aggregate the data from separate hospital organizations with
multiple wearable IoT devices to build a strong AI model for
medical tasks, such as human activity recognition, enabled by
homomorphic encryption for health data privacy preservation
[121]. By using the computational capability of distributed
hospitals, FL offers a powerful data analytic solution for
improving recognition accuracy rate compared to centralized
AI approaches, as confirmed in numerical simulations. To
reduce latency spent by communications among FL clients
and the server, a new chain-directed Synchronous Stochastic
Gradient Descent approach is introduced in [122] for personal
mobile sensing in healthcare applications. Based on a modified
DL4J library integrated on smartphones, two CNNs are performed by employing multi-channel sensing data, indicating
a high performance in terms of high training accuracy and
communication delays reduced by 53% with a Ring-scheduler

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

approach. Smartphones have been utilized in [123] to implement an FL algorithm for federated mobile healthcare, with
a focus on solving the cold start issue caused by slow data
generation and computation of certain mobile devices in the
cooperative FL process. For large-scale healthcare cooperation,
blockchain [124] has been emerged as a viable solution that
can be integrated with FL for building decentralized healthcare
systems involving a large number of medical entities acted as
data workers [125]. By using blockchain, the central authority
in the traditional FL architecture is eliminated, which promotes
network connectivity and accelerates the training process over
the large-scale healthcare system. Moreover, fine-grained data
access policies on blockchain, such as smart contracts [71],
can provide reliable authentication for federated health data
processing. A similar decentralized approach on a P2P network
for federated healthcare is also studied in [126]. In this context,
all data centers directly communicates with each other without
relying on a central authority, which thus reduces data leakage
due to curious third-parties and mitigates communication
delays.
Very recently, the potential of FL to support the fighting
against infectious diseases such as COVID-19 [127] has
been investigated [128], as indicated in Fig. 10. A number
of hospitals cooperatively communicate each other via the
blockchain to run DL algorithms locally for identifying CT
scans of COVID-19 patients. At each hospital, a deep capsule
network is developed to enhance image classification performance, while FL provides guidance for transmissions of model
updates to perform the model aggregation at a common hospital. Simulations from 34,006 CT scan slices (images) of 89
subjects verify a high COVID-19 image classification and low
data loss in FL algorithm running. FL is also used in [129] to
provide privacy-preserved AI solutions for COVID-19 chest Xray image analytics. Several practical experiments have been
implemented where multiple COVID-19 CXR image owners
run local learning networks such as ResNet18 for image
classification and then share the computed parameters with
a data center for mobile averaging while the data ownership
of each user is ensured.
B. FL for Smart Transportation
In the past few years, AI/ML techniques have been exploited
to enable intelligent transportation systems (ITSs) by performing centralized vehicular data learning at the data centre
[130], which requires data sharing in untrusted environments
and thus potentially introduces privacy issues. FL has been
introduced to bring AI functions to the network edge, involving
a number of participants, such as vehicles, to collaboratively
train globally shared AI models without the need for long
data transmission and compromising user privacy. Reviewing
the literature in the FL-based smart transportation domain, we
here focus on analyzing the applications of FL in vehicular
traffic planning and vehicular resource management.
1) FL for Vehicular Traffic Planning: Many FL-based architectures have been proposed to support vehicular traffic
planning which is an important service in ITS for traffic
prediction and vehicle control for congestion minimization.

19

Step 1: Initial Training via Blockchain
Attack Monitor

Hospital 1

Central Server

Local
Training

..
.
..
.

..
.
..
.

...

Step 2: Local Training and
Model Uploading

..
.

Local
Training

Model
aggregation

Step 3:
Averaging the
new learning

Attack Monitor

Step 1: Initial Training via Blockchain
Hospital N

Fig. 10: Federated learning for smart healthcare: A case study
for COVID-19 image classification with blockchain [128].

For example, FL is considered in [131] to replace traditional
centralized ML approaches in traffic prediction tasks by running ML models directly at the edge devices, e.g., vehicles,
based on their datasets such as road geometry, traffic flow and
weather. Another privacy-aware traffic prediction solution is
studied in [10] where multiple entities such as government,
companies, stations join to run a Gated Recurrent Unit neural
network (FedGRU) locally to estimate traffic flow and then
calculate local updates for aggregation at a data center. Here,
an improved FedAvg algorithm is developed based on a joint
announcement-enabled an aggregation mechanism for better
scalability of the FL scheme. Simulation results from using a
Caltrans Performance Measurement System (PeMS) database
[132] show less accuracy degradation and high privacy levels
over centralized learning methods. In [133], a traffic simulator
is introduced with the help of FL for guiding reinforcement
learning (RL) agents on vehicles in self-driving tasks by pooling their robotic car resources without sharing raw data. The
proposed scheme is promising to support collision avoidance
RL tasks in high-speed autonomous driving where latency
and privacy are among the critical concerns. To attract more
vehicles to run computation algorithms for traffic prediction,
an incentive mechanism is designed in [26] for UAVs-based
vehicular networks. In this scenario, UAVs are used to provide data collection and computation offloading support for
Internet of Vehicles (IoV), such as capturing car parking
and monitoring traffic conditions from stationary vehicles and
roadside units, and then participate in the privacy-preserved
collaborative model training. A contract is designed among six
UAVs and a single subregion to ensure the highest utility and
the lowest marginal cost of each UAV within coverage areas.
Meanwhile, the authors in [27] combine FL with blockchain
to build decentralized traffic planning solutions for vehicular
systems. Each vehicle acts as an FL client to run an ML model
and exchange computed updates together via a blockchain
ledger while verifying their corresponding rewards. The use
of blockchain potentially overcomes the challenges faced by

traditional FL approaches in terms of long communication and
security risks due to curious third-parties.
2) FL for Vehicular Resource Management: In addition to
traffic planning, FL has the potential to facilitate resource
management strategies for vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) networks.
An FL-based approach is introduced in [134] to support vehicular ultra-reliable low-latency communication (URLLC) where
each vehicle can learn a generalized Pareto distribution (GPD)
of network queues with respect to power control and resource
allocation without revealing the information of queue length
samples. Then, the computed GPD parameters are updated to
the RSU for aggregation in a longer time scale. Compared to
centralized learning approaches, FL offers more benefits for
intelligent vehicular services such as better efficiency in resource usage, lower power consumption with a similar learning
accuracy. Another resource allocation scheme for vehicle-toeverything (V2X) communication is also considered in [135].
In this setting, FL is combined with DRL [136] to build a
federated intelligent resource allocation strategy, in order to
maximize the sum capacity of vehicular users with respect
to latency and reliability conditions. Each vehicular user is
regarded as a DRL agent in the FL architecture to run a DNN
algorithm for optimal mode selection and resource allocation,
while the BS aggregates the updates offloaded from users to
build undirected graphs using channel gain information. Further, motivated by FL-based optimization for IoT data caching
as discussed in subsection III-B2, a federated solution for
caching and computing resource management in MEC-based
vehicular networks is proposed in [63]. In particular, vehicles
cooperatively communicate with RSUs to perform federated
learning in which each entity computes a sub-gradient descent
update as part of the joint parameter optimization for system
cost minimization. Simulations with five RSUs and several
vehicles demonstrate a high performance regarding learning
accuracy compared to non-cooperative learning approaches
[137]. The authors in [138] also build a federated Q-learning
algorithm for cooperative tasks offloading with multiple V2X,
aiming to optimize the failure probability and communication
resource usage. A consensus Q-table is designed to guide the
Q-learning agent to make decisions, e.g., offloading selection,
in a federated manner for minimizing running cost over the
vehicular network.
C. FL for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
UAVs play an important role in various services such as
goods delivery, disaster monitoring or military and have been
regarded as a key technology in 5G/6G wireless networks
[139] due to its high flexibility and seamless connectivity. To
provide intelligence in UAV networks, AI/ML techniques have
been used for UAV tasks at ground BSs such as trajectory
planning, power control, target recognition [140]. However,
because of the high mobility and high altitude of UAVs, it is
challenging to ensure the continuous communications between
UAVs and BSs with respect to dynamic aerial environment
conditions. Therefore, using centralized AI/ML approaches to
perform UAV tasks may not be an ideal solution, especially
when having to transmit a large amount of data over the aerial

20

links. Distributed learning, such as FL, can provide better
learning solutions for intelligent UAVs networks by using a
cooperation of multiple UAVs without transferring raw data to
BSs and sacrificing data privacy. We here analyze the use of
FL in UAVs via two aspects, including UAV communications
and UAV network management.
1) FL for UAV Communications: Several works have been
done on the use of FL for facilitating UAV communications.
The study in [141] leverages FL to build a federated path
control strategy for large-scale UAV networks. Each UAV runs
a NN and then share the model parameters with a central unit
for obtaining a global model, which makes the estimation of
the population density function at UAVs more accurate. The
use of FL would mitigate the data volume transferred over
the aerial environment and thus reduce communication delays
and privacy concerns, while increasing training speed of the
global model due to the employment of computing resources
of all UAVs. The simulations confirm that federated learning
algorithms can reduce transmission time, motion energy of
UAV communications, as well as achieve minimum collision
risks in windy environments. Instead of using a central server
like in [141], the authors in [142] use a leading UAV as an
FL aggregator to manage a swarm of following UAVs in an
intra-swarm network. Based on a defined minimum number of
communication rounds, the key objective is to jointly optimize
both power allocation and scheduling for UAVs, aiming to
reduce the FL convergence round, with respect to learning, communication delay, and flying coverage constraints.
Through a numerical simulation, the proposed joint scheme
can reduce the convergence round by 35%, compared to nonjoint schemes (i.e., power allocation or scheduling design).
Another work in [143] pays attention to federated beamforming design [144] for UAV communications, by employing a
local extreme learning machine (ELM) model with respect to
CSI consideration. Then, a stochastic parallel random walk
alternating direction algorithm is designed based on UAV
dynamics and CSI collection to accelerate the convergence rate
to a consensus among UAVs. Another work in [145] focuses
on developing a convolutional auto-encoder based on FL for
illumination distribution in UAV communications. Unlike the
traditionally centralized ML techniques that perform all ML
learning at a server with a complete set of illumination data,
FL enables UAVs to collaboratively train the auto-encoder
only by using their partial illumination data, which potentially
reduces transmission power and improves privacy. In this way,
UAVs have more flexible solutions to adjust its serving position and user association for communication power savings.
Toward UAV-based 6G networks, FL has been used in [146]
for on-demand 3D deployment by connecting UAVs with a
BS. In particular, an air-to-air FL algorithm is built that allows
UAVs to train their model within the aerial environments, with
the help of controllable deployments of cooperative UAVs for
low communication energy consumption while remaining high
learning accuracy.
2) FL for UAV Network Management: The work in [147]
studies a federated UAV management architecture for aerial
UAV swarms sensing network integrated with a ground sensing
network for forming a hybrid spatio-temporal sensing system,

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

Federated Sensing

Central
Server
Environment
Sensing

Environment
Sensing

Vision Guidance

Ground Wireless
Sensor Network

Sensor
Nodes

Sensor
Nodes

Sensor
Nodes

Fig. 11: Federated learning for UAV-based ground air quality
monitoring [147].

as shown in Fig. 11. Each UAV acts as an FL client to monitor
the air quality index in its coverage area without revealing
raw data by cooperating UAVs with a central server which
is responsible for running a light-weight DenseMobileNet
model based on haze features offloaded from distributed
UAVs. The ultimate goal is to provide air quality forecasts
while controlling UAV energy consumption in aerial sensing
tasks. Compared to CNN and SVM-based algorithms, the
proposed federated learning scheme can achieve a better
accuracy in air quality estimation with privacy protection
and energy efficiency. Based on the FL concept for IoT
attack detection in subsection III-C, a federated UAV network management architecture is also considered in [148]
for solving issues related to security threats. To be clear, a
federated jamming attack detection approach is introduced
that allows UAV clients to perform AI model training locally
with respect to communication efficiency and unbalanced data
properties before sharing computed updates to a server based
on a Dempster-Shafer theory-based client group prioritization
model. By using a CRAWDAD jamming attack dataset, the
learning accuracy for jamming detection is improved with low
training time in various UAV group evaluations. A similar
security protection scheme is presented in [149] where FL is
combined with reinforcement learning for defense strategies
against jamming attack. Learning updates from FL models at
UAVs are combined by a Q-learning table using a Bellman
equation [150] that is able to determine optimal UAV paths
for minimal security risks. The application of the adaptive
federated reinforcement learning approach thus can achieve
high accuracy rate in attack detection (over 82%) with fast
convergence rate and high learning rewards.

21

D. FL for Smart City
The integration of smart devices and high-tech infrastructure, and integrated monitoring systems in city environments
along with communication technologies forms smart city
ecosystems, aiming to promote the quality of life for urban
citizens, by enabling the seamless delivery of food, water,
and energy to end users [151]. To realize smart cities, AI/ML
techniques have been widely adopted to provide intelligence
properties thanks to their ability to handle real-time big data
generated from sensors, devices, and human activities [152].
To do that, most of AI-based smart city solutions rely on
a centralized learning architecture on a data center, such
as a cloud server, which is obviously not scalable to the
rapid expansion of smart devices in smart cities. FL offer
more attractive features for enabling decentralized smart city
applications with high privacy levels and low communication
delays. There are two key domains FL can offer useful services
for smart city, including data management and smart grid.
1) FL for Data Management: With its decentralized and
privacy-preserved nature, FL has been exploited to provide distributed AI functions for large-scale intelligent data management systems in smart cities. For example, a semi-supervised
FL method called FedSem is introduced in [48] to provide
distributed processing for unlabeled data in smart cities. To
evaluate the usefulness of FL in a smart city, a prototype
with smart vehicles is considered where each vehicle learns
a DNN model based on traffic sign image datasets. Then,
a central server coordinates to select multiple participants
in each learning round for model orchestrating. A German
traffic sign dataset between 1000 vehicles is employed to
simulate the FL algorithm in a fashion in each round, only
30 vehicles are selected to train and perform model updating.
Implementation results indicate a good performance in terms
of high accuracy without much testing loss for unlabeled smart
city data. To overcome the challenges posed by the ubiquity
of smart city data from different streams and devices and
user privacy concerns, FL is also used in [153] to structure
data streams from ubiquitous IoT devices that act as FL
clients to perform local learning without sharing their data to
external third-parties. This would reshape the current forms of
smart cities by providing newly exiting services such as smart
urban communication, social economy sharing, social activity
monitoring, and interconnection of global citizens [154]. These
services can be empowered by intelligent sensing which allows
IoT devices to sense physical environments and perform data
learning for extracting useful information to serve end users
[99]. In this regard, FL can be employed to develop distributed
sensing platforms with pervasive computing for smart cities.
Each device can collect data locally and runs part of an AI
model such as a NN, using its hardware without exchanging
its personal information for security and privacy. As a result,
communication costs such as latency are significantly reduced
while learning qualities are ensured. FL for mobile pervasive
computing in smart cities is also considered in [155]. For
example, vehicles can join an FL system to collaboratively
train AI models for prediction of locations of charger installations without revealing information to RSUs. This kind of

on-device processing offered by FL thus can help solve issues
related to data ethics, data privacy, and security in smart city
services. Meanwhile, the authors in [55] suggest to use FL for
building a video data management platform in smart cities. To
be specific, videos can be collected as live street videos from
connected mobile cameras such as IoT devices on buses, roads
and transferred to edge devices. Then, each edge device runs
a semi-supervised learning algorithm that can perform local
video analytics based on multiple video segments divided from
raw video frames. To solve the issue of the non-IID data, a
FedSwap operation solution is proposed, aiming to mitigate
the diversity of the data and increase the accuracy of image
classification by 3.8%, as confirmed in simulations.
2) FL for Smart Grid: Smart grid holds an significant role
in supporting industrial systems and manufacturing processes,
by delivering energy resources to the households and factories
via electrical grids [156]. FL can provide privacy-enhanced
intelligent solutions to realize safe smart grid operations.
Indeed, FL is used to establish federated predictive power
schemes in a network of edge data centers that run a recurrent
neural network locally to estimate future energy demands
based on historical customer energy usage datasets before
being aggregated at a cloud server for constructing a global
prediction model [157]. In this way, user information such as
energy preference and home addresses is not revealed to the
cloud for privacy protection. Moreover, by cooperating data
centers over different urban areas, the prediction model can
achieve a high learning performance with better accuracy rate,
compared to centralized learning solutions at a single server
[158]. Another FL algorithm is also designed in [159] for
electricity power learning in power IoT networks consisting
of electric providers and IoT users. A communication model
is then formulated based on an FL process that aims to solve
the tradeoff between resource consumption, user utility and
local differential privacy.
E. FL for Smart Industry
Smart industry refers to the integration of intelligence into
manufacturing processes where AI techniques such as ML and
DL play important roles in learning big data generated from
industrial machines for process modeling, monitoring, prediction and control in production stages [160]. The performance
of AI functions mostly depends on available training data, but
it requires sharing among companies and factories. Due to the
raising concerns of user privacy issues, sharing a large amount
of data over the industrial networks for AI implementation
is not an efficient solution. FL has emerged as a much more
attractive approach that helps realize intelligence for industrial
systems without data exchange and privacy leakage [161], as
shown in Fig. 12. Here we focus on analyzing the roles of
FL in robotics and Industry 4.0, and then discuss efficient FL
solutions for industrial edge-based IoT. Then, we introduce
several real-world FL implementation cases and testbeds in
industrial IoT.
1) FL for Robotics and Industry 4.0: Robotic is a crucial
component of automobile industrial systems that is able to handle manufacturing tasks by its automated and programmable

22

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

Cloud
server

Global Model
M2.1

Model
download

Model
upload

MEC
Server

Local Model
Training and
Evaluation

Global Model
M1

Model
Aggregation

MEC
Server

MEC
Server

Local Model
Training and
Evaluation

Local Model
Training and
Evaluation

Model M2

Industrial
Devices

Global Model
M2.2

Model M1

Industrial
Devices

Model M2

Industrial
Devices

Fig. 12: Federated learning for cooperative industry [161].
features. How to perform real-time data processing and protect
data privacy for robotic systems is a critical challenge. FL can
help solve these problems by allocating intelligence to robotic
devices, instead of relying on a remote server for data processing. For example, FL can be adopted to support robotics
in data learning by implementing AI models at local robots
without unpredictable network transmission delays [162]. In
this way, each robot only offloads the gradient parameters
updates to build a shared model at the cloud without sharing its
raw data for privacy guarantees based on a differential privacy
technique. The authors in [163], [164] investigate a federated
imitation learning scheme for cloud robotics. Each robot
participates in training an imitation NN using its own sensor
image dataset. Then, it offloads the updated parameters to the
cloud for fusing knowledge before sending back to robots
for the next round of learning and thus, robots can benefit
from exchanged knowledge values. Through communication
rounds, the server can accumulate a significant knowledge of
different robots to build a powerful learning model, and thus
the imitation learning efficiency and accuracy of local robots
can be improved in comparison with centralized learning
approaches. As an extended version of cloud computing,
fog/edge computing is also helpful to provide low-latency
communication for federated robotics [165]. Both computing,
networking, and storage resources among robots are shared
with a fog server for enabling federated learning with security
awareness. Edge computing is also integrated with FL in [166]
to realize a collaborative learning among robotic arm devices.
Due to the complexity and dynamics, each device runs a
separate reinforcement learning model for determining its own
control policy, and then shares mature policy model parameters
to a cloud server for combination. Experiments on multiple
rotary inverted pendulum devices [166] confirm high learning

performance regarding learning speed with respect to different
learning clients. Enabled by the FL-based IoT localization
concept as presented in subsection III-D, a federated Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) system with cloud
computing is deployed in [167]. Three robots coordinate with
a cloud server to build an FL algorithm, aiming to construct
a global map of an unknown environment enabled by a deep
learning detector that can achieve robust feature extraction and
high feature matching accuracy.
In the industrial revolution, Industry 4.0 is the new concept
whose aim is to promote the automation of manufacturing
and industrial operations, which stimulates the development of
smart factories for producing smart products without human
involvement [168]. FL can be used to support distributed
intelligent industry 4.0 systems. As an example, a privacypreserved FL framework is introduced in [169] to realize
industrial intelligence where multiple mobile users join to
build a common AI model based on local gradients that are
encrypted with homomorphic ciphertext with a distributed
Gaussian mechanism at a cloud server. This solution potentially reduces the risks of privacy leakage from the local
gradients and shared parameters in the FL communication
rounds. To enhance the performance of compound TCP in
industry 4.0 WiFi networks, the authors in [170] suggest to
use FL to collaborate multiple access points with respect to
WiFi uploading and downloading dynamics and wireless data
losses. Each access point performs a regression model based
on quality of service (QoS) data samples and specifies learning
parameters for contributing to a global server. Recently, an
integrated FL-blockchain architecture is designed for industrial
IoT networks [171]. FL provides the ability of distributed
learning at local IoT devices by using both static data and data
streams, while blockchain can provide high degrees of security

23

with immutable ledgers and smart contracts that can provide
authentication for learning interactions in FL implementation.
Blockchain is also employed in [172] to provide security for
FL implementation in industrial 4.0 networks. By using linked
transactions, learning updates are verified and transmitted
effectively for model aggregation, which in return accelerates
learning convergence for FL algorithms.
2) Efficient FL for Industrial Edge-based IoT Networks:
In recent years, industrial edge computing has been applied
widely in IoT networks due to its capability to provide instant
computation and storage services [173]. The introduction of
edge computing in IIoT can also significantly reduce the
decision-making latency and save bandwidth resource. To
enable intelligent and privacy-enhanced edge-based IIoT applications, efficient FL solutions have been applied by using the
distributed learning capability of edge devices and the training
federation in IIoT networks from both communication and
network resource aspects.
- Communication-efficient FL for industrial edge-based IoT:
The authors in [174] consider a communication-efficient FL
approach called CE-FedAvg which is able to reduce the
number of rounds to convergence and the total data uploaded
per round over the traditional FedAvg scheme. This is realized
by using a joint design of distributed Adam optimization
and compression of uploaded models. In each communication
round, the model server selects a subset of clients based on
their power/communication properties and sends the weights
and moments to them. Then, the server dequantizes and
reconstructs the sparse updates from the clients and averages the updates for a global model that is downloaded by
clients for sparsifying and quantizing the model deltas and
sparse indices for compression. Implementation results on
an industrial edge computing-like testbed using Raspberry Pi
clients show the effectiveness of the proposed scheme with
lower communication latency while the training accuracy is
preserved. To solve the communication overhead issues for
parameter synchronization in FL, a general gradient sparsification (GGS) framework is proposed in [175] for FL-based edge
IoT networks. The key idea is to combine gradient correction
and batch normalization which allows the FL optimizer to
properly treat the accumulated insignificant gradients, which
makes the model converge better. It also mitigates the impact
of delayed gradients on the global training without increasing
the communication overhead. Also, a dynamic FL solution
is proposed in [176] for power grid-based MEC environments where industrial IoT nodes such as metering devices
collaborate with an MEC server to build an ML model for.
To solve the issue of failure of communications between
industrial clients and the server, a delay deadline constrainedFL framework is considered to avoid extremely long training
delay via a dynamic client selection problem formulation
for maximizing the computing utility with communication
latency reduction in the FL process. Another solution named
communication-mitigated federated learning (CMFL) is introduced in [177] for reducing communication overhead for FLbased edge IoT networks. CMFL provides clients with the
feedback information regarding the global tendency of model
updates, aiming to identify the relevance of an update at a

client with others. To do so, in each learning iteration, a
client first receives the feedback information about the global
update from the central server. Next, the client proceeds its
local training and produces a local update. The client then
compares it with the global update, checking how well the
two gradients align with each other. By avoiding uploading
those irrelevant updates to the server, CMFL can substantially
reduce the communication overhead while still guaranteeing
learning convergence.
- Network resource-efficient FL for industrial edge-based
IoT: Network resource optimization and allocation are important to ensure robust FL training over distributed edge
IoT networks. For example, a fair network resource allocation framework in wireless networks is suggested in [178]
that encourages a more uniform resource (e.g., bandwidth)
distribution across devices in FL-based edge networks. This
allows for minimizing the aggregated reweighted loss such
that the devices with higher loss are given higher relative
weight, by taking into account the important characteristics
of the federated setting such as communication-efficiency and
low participation of devices. The work in [179] focuses on
formulating a joint computation and transmission optimization
problem, aiming to minimize the total energy consumption
for local computation and wireless transmission in FL-based
edge IoT systems. To solve this problem, an iterative algorithm
is proposed with low complexity where in each step of this
algorithm, new closed-form solutions are derived for the joint
optimization of time allocation, bandwidth allocation, power
control, computation frequency, and learning accuracy. In
FL-based edge networks, how the model owner can decide
amounts of energy recharged to the workers and to choose
channels, i.e., the default channel or the special channels,
for global model transmissions to maximize the number of
successful transmissions while minimizing the energy cost is
highly important. To overcome these challenges, the work in
[180] proposes to employ a DRL algorithm that enables the
model owner to find the optimal decisions on the energy and
the channels with no existing network knowledge. A stochastic
optimization problem of the model owner is derived that
maximizes the number of global model transmissions while
minimizing the energy cost and the channel cost. Furthermore,
an industrial IoT-based FL scheme is also studied in [181]
with a focus on resource management for mobile IoT devices
such as robots by considering multiple resource constraints,
e.g., bandwidth, processor, or battery life which has not
been considered in previous FL schemes with assumptions of
sufficient resource availability. In each communication round,
the resource availability is checked for model training and
the trust score of each robot is verified to make decision
for client training. Regarding the robots with delayed model
update response, the trust score can be adjusted in the next
round of training, which potentially reduces the straggler effect
in robotic-based FL systems.
3) FL Implementation and Testbeds in industrial IoT:
Inspired by the great potential of FL in IoT systems, there
are several recent projects implemented to investigate the
feasibility of FL in real-life industrial applications. As an
example, the work in [182] implements a testbed for an FL-

24

based smart home platform in a real-world IoT setting. More
specifically, a smart home architecture is proposed, consisting
of smart home IoT devices (e.g., camera, light bulb, door
locks), a router, and an intrusion detection system with a
SQLite database. By using an FL algorithm, smart home
devices can train an ML model using their local information
to share the learned models with the router for combination.
In this way, FL helps users (i.e., smart home owners) to build
home assistant solutions such as object detection and control
their home by the coordination of distributed IoT devices in
a privacy-preserving manner. Another project in [183] focuses
on a verifiable FL platform to achieve efficient and secure
model training in industrial IoT. A verification mechanism
is built at the FL clients (i.e., industrial IoT devices) to
verify the accuracy of the aggregated results based on the
characteristics of Lagrange interpolation, which allows devices
to detect forged results in the FL training. The proposed FL
model is promising to solve secure training issues in intelligent
industrial applications. For example, FL can be used to train
risk assessment models in enterprise risk assessment tasks,
by collaborating multiple banks to build high-quality risk
assessment models without leaking the enterprise customer
data. FL is also tested in [184] to provide privacy-preserved
intelligence for cyber physical systems smart farming and
smart logistics in industries. A platform called FengHuoLun is
designed involving three views from macro to micro, namely
entity view, edge view, and global view. Here, the entity view
includes industrial IoT devices; the edge view implements
the business requirements from industrial stakeholders, while
the global view is at the cloud layer for running an FL
algorithm that aggregates distributed ML models computed
at local devices in the entity layer. A testbed is implemented
in a wireless sensor network for intelligent abnormal detection
with sparse representation, but experimental results have not
been reported. In [64], an FL-based system is integrated in
fog environments where collaborative IoT devices (e.g., smart
factory machines) perform local data processing and transmit
their learned parameters to a cloud server for model aggregation after each time interval. A testbed is implemented on a
MNIST dataset combined with data traces from a Raspberry
Pi to simulate the network delays and resource usage when
integrating FL in IoT networks. The implementation results
verify the efficiency of FL in terms of low communication
latency due to model learning without sharing raw data
and privacy preservation with guaranteed training accuracy.
Several other works also investigate the practicality of FL
in real-world healthcare settings. For instance, a federated
edge learning system called FEEL is designed in [185] for
mobile healthcare. Here, an edge-based training task offloading
strategy is proposed to improve the training efficiency at
distributed health users, while a differential privacy scheme
is integrated to strengthen the privacy preservation during the
FL training. A real-world healthcare FL experiment is tested
in a network of 100 hospitals with using clump thickness as
physiological attributes for building training samples, showing
a low resource consumption and good privacy protection.
In summary, we list FL-IoT applications in the taxonomy
Table V and Table VI to summarize the technical aspects as

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

well as the key contributions and limitations of each reference
work.
V. L ESSONS L EARNED
In this section, we summarize the key lessons learned from
this survey, which thus provide an overall picture on the
current research of FL-IoT services and applications.
A. Lessons Learned from FL-IoT Services
Reviewing the state-of-the-art in the field, we find that FL
plays an increasingly important role in facilitating intelligent
IoT services in a wide range of applied domains, as highlighted
as follows.
1) FL Serving as an Alternative to IoT Data Sharing: FLIoT can achieve privacy-enhanced and scalable data sharing in
IoT networks among decentralized multiple parties without the
need for direct data offloading to cloud servers or third-parties.
From [51], it can be learned that FL is an efficient approach for
federated data sharing among multiple clients (e.g., factories)
in IoT tasks such as tensor mining. By using FL, the server
only collects the ciphertext data and federates them into a
tensor, while raw data are kept at the local factories, which thus
protects data privacy for the tensor mining. Particularly, FL can
be combined with other privacy techniques such as differential
privacy [53] to improve the privacy of local updates, by
integrating it into gradient descent training for enabling secure
and robust FL sharing. Moreover, the security of FL-based data
sharing can be improved by combining with the blockchain
technology, as shown in [54]. In this context, the information
of trained parameters can be appended into immutable blocks
on the blockchain during the client-server communications.
2) FL for the Optimization of IoT Data Offloading and
Caching: Due to the high data distribution of large-scale IoT
networks, FL can provide distributed AI solutions to support
intelligent data offloading and caching at the network edge
[59]. The use of FL enables distributed data offloading by
leveraging computation capabilities of IoT devices to achieve
an overall offloading target, such as offloading latency minimization [44]. Each FL client (such as a mobile device) acts as
a local optimizer to solve an optimization problem formulated
to achieve optimal offloading. Also, the federation of mobile
users helps eliminate the need for a central server of offloaded
data processing, instead of performing local training by using
their own dataset. Then, each user exchanges the local updates
for computing a global model for privacy and computing
efficiency. FL can also offer innovative data offloading in
vehicular networks [63] in which vehicles and RSUs can share
a common learning model to build a cooperative learning
architecture, aiming to reduce learning costs with respect to
agent selection and data sharing in task offloading.
In addition to that, the use of FL also helps overcome the
challenges faced by traditional learning approaches in terms
of high privacy concerns since data users may not trust the
third-party server and thus hesitate to offload their private
data for IoT data caching. In fact, FL is very useful to build
proactive data caching schemes in edge computing without
the need for direct access to user data [66]. Such that, mobile

25

TABLE V: Taxonomy of FL-IoT applications.
Issue

Ref.

ML
type
DNN

FL
clients
Hospitals

FL
aggregator
Cloud server

HFL

NN

Hospitals

Data server

DFL

NN

Hospitals

Hospitals

DFL

SVM

Health
users

Data center

Key contributions

Limitations

A collaborative learning with FL
for EHRs processing.
An FL scheme for EHRs learning
in distributed hospitals.
A fully decentralized EHRs
learning with FL.
An FL-based distributed binary
supervised classification scheme.

Convergence of the FL algorithm
has not been verified.
The proposed model is simple and
lacks detailed evaluations.
Privacy of EHRs has not been
considered.
Simulation results for FL
implementation have not been
reported.
The healthcare scalability of the
proposed method has not been
considered.
Accuracy of the FL algorithm has
not been verified.
IoT user privacy has not ben
taken into consideration.

[114]

EHRs
management

DFL

SVM

Medical
sites

Data center

[115]

EHRs
management
Healthcare
cooperation

VFL

-

Data center

HFL

NN

Healthcare
cooperation
Healthcare
cooperation

HFL

CNN

FTL

CNN

EHRs
owners
Healthcare
IoT
devices
IoT
devices
Hospitals

Healthcare
cooperation
Healthcare
cooperation
Healthcare
cooperation
Healthcare
cooperation
Vehicular
traffic
planning
Vehicular
traffic
planning
Vehicular
traffic
planning
Vehicular
traffic
planning
Vehicular
traffic
planning
Vehicular
resource
management
Vehicular
resource
management
Vehicular
resource
management

CFL

RL

Smartphones Data server

DFL

-

DFL

CNN

Data
workers
Data centers

DFL

CNN

Data
workers
Data
centers
Hospitals

HFL

-

Vehicles

Cloud server

HFL

RL

Data
owners

Data center

An FL-based scheme for traffic
flow estimation.

Numerical simulations for privacy
is lacked.

VFL

-

Car
agents

FL server

An FL-based scheme for traffic
collision avoidance tasks.

Latency for FL simulations has
not been investigated.

VFL

-

UAVs

Data server

A contract model for FLbased
traffic control.

The feasibility of the proposed
model has not been evaluated.

DFL

NN

Vehicles

Vehicles

A decentralized FL approach with
blockchain for vehicular networks.

CFL

-

Vehicles

RSU

CFL

DRL

Vehicles

BS

An FL approach for resource
allocation and power control in
ITS.
A federated resource allocation
scheme for V2X.

The impacts of blockchain
running on FL have not been
investigated.
Learning latency has not been
tested.
Learning accuracy has not been
investigated.

DFL

NN

Vehicles

RSUs

A federated resource management
for MEC-based V2V.

Privacy simulation of FL has not
been verified.

[111]
[112]

FL for Smart healthcare

FL
type
HFL

EHRs
management
EHRs
management
EHRs
management
EHRs
management

[110]

[116]
[118]
[119]
[120]
[122]
[125]
[126]
[128]
[131]

FL for Smart Transportation

Use case

[10]
[133]
[26]
[27]
[134]
[135]
[63]

Data server
Cloud server
Cloud server

Hospitals

users can download the AI model from a cache entity, such
as an edge server, to perform local training before sending
back the computed model to the server for aggregation in
an iterative manner, for selecting the most popular files for
caching. FL is also integrated with blockchain to build secure
learning schemes for content caching in edge computing [70].
IoT devices participate in the local training using their own
datasets to learn the features of users and files, and share the
gradient updates to the edge server for popular file estimation,
aiming to improve the overall cache hit rate.
3) FL for IoT Attack Detection: The heterogeneity of
IoT applications and services has become a main target of

An FL-based scheme for drug
reaction prediction on distributed
EHRs.
A secure FLempowered scheme
for EHRs computation.
An efficient FLbased model for
healthcare.
A cloud-edgebased healthcare
model with FL.
A scheme for federated activity
recognition with FL.
A mobile FL scheme for
cooperative healthcare.
A DFL architecture for healthcare
with blockchain.
A P2P network for for healthcare
with FL.
A DFL framework for COVID-19
image classification.
An FL approach for federated
traffic prediction.

Attack analysis for FL has not
been provided.
The scalability with more
hospitals has not been
investigated.
The proposed model is simple
with a lack of detailed analysis.
Performance of blockchain has
not been verified.
FL convergence has not been
investigated.
The simulations of blockchain is
lacked.
No detailed simulations are given.

malicious adversaries that can attack AI/ML models integrated
in IoT networks. FL has emerged as a strong alternative to
perform distributed learning for IoT networks with the ability
to detect a wide range of attacks and support network defense
solutions [75]. Enabled by the privacy-enhancing features of
FL, federated attack detection and defense solutions can be
realized where each IoT device joins to run an AI model, such
as DNN, in order to retrain the threat model to fight against
adversaries [45]. The cooperation of multiple devices accelerates the learning process and improves learning accuracy while
mitigating the risks of attack on the model learning. Moreover,
FL also facilitates the detection of compromised IoT devices

26

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

TABLE VI: Taxonomy of FL-IoT applications (continued).
Issue

Ref.

FL
type
HFL

ML
type
NN

FL
clients
UAVs

FL
aggregator
Central unit

HFL

-

UAVs

UAV

UAV
beamforming
design
UAV communications

DFL

Extreme
ML

UAVs

UAVs

VFL

CNN

UAVs

Data server

UAV energy
management
UAV security
management

HFL

-

UAVs

HFL

NN

UAVs

Central
server
Data server

VFL

DNN

Vehicles

BS

DFL

NN

VFL

-

IoT
devices
Edge
devices

IoT devices

[55]

City data
management
City data
sensing
City video
analytics
Smart energy
prediction

HFL

NN

Data
centers

Cloud

[157]

A federated energy prediction in
smart cities.

Energy load
prediction

HFL

LSTM,
DNN

Smart
meters

MEC server

[158]

A federated model for energy
load prediction.

Power
management

DFL

NN

Electric
providers

IoT users

[159]

An FL-based scheme for power
IoT networks.

Robotic
management

VFL

CNN

Robotics

Cloud server

[162]

An FL-based scheme for robotic
management.

HFL

NN

Robotics

Cloud server

HFL

RL

VFL

-

Robotic
arms
Mobile
devices

Cloud server

[169]

Federated
cloud robotics
Federated
robotic arms
Industrial
intelligence
Federated
WiFi network

HFL

-

[170]

Access
points

Central
server

DNN

IoT
devices
Edge
devices

IoT devices

An imitation learning scheme
for federated cloud robotics.
Federated reinforcement learning
for robotic arms.
A secure federated model
learning for industrial
intelligence.
A federated compound TCP
scheme in industry 4.0 WiFi
networks.
An integrated FL-blockchain
scheme for industrial IoT.
A communication-efficient FL
approach called CE-FedAvg for
optimizing communication
rounds.
A solution for reducing
communication overhead for
FL-based edge IoT networks.
A fair network resource
allocation framework for
FL-based edge networks.
A network resource allocation
scheme for FL-edge computing.

[141]

FL for UAVs

[142]
[143]
[145]
[147]
[148]

[48]

FL for Smart city

[99]

FL for Smart industry

[163]
[166]

[171]
[174]

[177]
[178]
[179]
[180]

Use case
UAV path
control
UAV communications

Secure
DFL
industrial IoT
Communication- HFL
efficient
FL
Communicationefficient
FL
Network
resource
allocation
Network
resource
allocation
Network
resource
allocation

NN

Cloud

Cloud server

Cloud server

HFL

-

Edge
devices

Model
aggregator

HFL

-

Edge
devices

Model
aggregator

HFL

-

Mobile
users

Edge server

HFL

DRL

Mobile
users

Model
owner

Key contributions

Limitations

An FL-based scheme for
federated UAV path control.
An FL-based framework for
UAV power control and
scheduling.
A federated beamforming design
for UAV communications.

Training latency has not been
analyzed.
Privacy of UAV communications
has not been taken into account.

An FL-enabled model for
illumination distribution in UAV
communications.
A federated UAV scheme for
aerial air quality sensing.
A federated scheme for attack
detection in UAV networks.

The scalability of federated UAV
network has not been explored.

A federated data learning for
smart city.
A federated sensing platform for
smart cities.
A federated model for video
analytics in smart cities.

The proposed smart city model
is simple.
Convergence performance has
not been verified.
Issues related to privacy of
videos have not been
investigated.
Comparison of ML techniques
in FL simulation has not been
performed.
Simulations for convergence and
learning latency have not been
conducted.
Learning efficiency, e.g., latency,
has not been verified.

A DRL-based approach for
network resource optimization in
FL-edge computing.

UAV power control is not
considered in FL design.

UAV communication latency has
not been taken into account.
Convergence latency of FL
algorithms should be included.

Data loss caused by
communication has not been
considered.
Data privacy and security have
not been investigated.
Simulation is simple no details
of FL results are reported.
Learning performances of FL
have not been detailed.
Scalability for FL-based WiFi
network has not been
investigated.
Performance of smart contracts
has not been detailed.
The impact of lazy nodes on
local training has not been
considered.
Resource optimization for local
training has not been
investigated.
Allocation of resource for model
aggregation should be included.
Numerical simulations for
privacy is lacked.
The proposed FL scheme is
simple and not scalable to
multi-edge networks.

27

in federated IoT networks. In fact, with the sophistication of
attacks and threats, it is challenging to detect them with current
centralized AI approaches that often recognize attacks by
making deviations from user behavior profiles, which suffers
from high false alarm rate and long detection delay. FL comes
as a natural solution to perform attack detection algorithms for
distributed IoT networks [82]. Each IoT can submit a detection
profile obtained by local training to a security gateway where
local updates are aggregated to build a common detection
model for the IoT network. The involvement of a large number
of IoT networks with diverse features and massive datasets
enhances the learning accuracy for better attack detection
efficiency. To improve the scalability of detection of attacks,
such as intrusion, line-speed and scalable FL approaches
have recently introduced [86]. Each IoT device runs a neural
network for packet classification at the line speed of nearby
switches in a scalable manner, while preserving privacy of
network traces.
4) FL for IoT Localization: FL can provide interesting solutions for enabling efficient and privacy-enhanced localization
services, aiming to solve problems such as the lack of robustness due to the dynamics of mobile environments and privacy
leakage bottlenecks caused by the centralized data processing
architecture. As indicated in [46], FL can provide privacy
for indoor localization services by forming a decentralized
indoor localization scheme using the computational capability
of distributed mobile devices without compromising sensor
data. We also find that homomorphic encryption techniques
are very useful to further improve privacy in FL training,
by allowing for local update encryption which helps prevent
the central server from guessing decryption result before
aggregation. This in turn provides high security for data
training while ensuring a high location estimation accuracy.
Furthermore, according to [90], FL is able to minimize the bias
of location estimation with privacy guarantees by cooperating
multiple users in the model learning using local fingerprint
data. The usefulness of FL thus opens new opportunities for
emerging localization services, such as localization in mobile
indoor networks with global positioning system, mobile target
tracking and navigation.
5) FL for IoT Mobile Crowdsensing: Traditionally, the
reliance of a central server such as a single cloud to handle all
sensing data is not a scalable solution, making it hard to cope
with the massive volume of data from ubiquitous IoT devices.
FL would be a very promising tool to accelerate the learning
and training for crowdsensing models. Each client selects a
learning strategy for solving its local sub-problem to ensure
desired accuracy with lowest participation costs, while the central server builds a utility function by averaging local updates
to offer rewards to the clients [96]. Particularly, to overcome
the challenges faced by conventional FL architectures with
a central aggregator, which can incur high communication
overhead and less robustness, decentralized FL has emerged
as a promising solution for large-scale crowdsensing tasks
[99]. In this way, each IoT node only needs to compute the
model based on its mini-batch instead of the whole datasets,
which will reduce computation latency accordingly. Among
decentralized technologies, blockchain is a strong candidate

that can be combined with FL to decentralize the learning
process in UAV-based crowdsensing services [100]. FL allows
UAVs to train local models using sensing datasets and share
updates via the blockchain ledger for server communication
and model combination in a secure and transparent manner.
6) FL-based Techniques for Privacy and Security in IoT
Services and Networks: FL also appears as an attractive
approach for enabling intelligent privacy and security services
in IoT networks. As indicated by [101], FL is useful to
enhance data privacy in IoT environments (e.g, vehicular
networks). This is enabled by the fact that participants (e.g.,
vehicles) are allowed to train models locally with their own
data without the need for sharing sensitive user data, which
contributes significantly to protecting data privacy. To replace
the centralized entity that is commonly used in FL systems,
blockchain is an ideal candidate to build a decentralized FLIoT system to solve issues of single-point failures by using
consensus protocols (e.g., shared mining) to synchronize and
coordinate the FL training [103], [106]. These solutions give
insights into developing serverless learning architectures for
security improvements in FL-IoT systems.
B. Lessons Learned from FL-IoT Applications
In this sub-section, we discuss the key lessons acquired from
the use of FL in various IoT applications.
1) FL for Smart Healthcare: FL can provide a number
of efficient solutions for smart healthcare and potentially reshapes the current intelligent healthcare systems by proving AI
functions for supporting healthcare services while improving
user privacy and reducing low latency with the cooperation of
multiple entities such as health users and healthcare providers
across medical institutions [47]. It can be learned from [110]
that FL can enable flexible and privacy-preserving EHRs management in healthcare operations, by building intelligent EHRs
systems with the cooperation of multiple medical institutions
and a powerful server such as the cloud. We also find that
a few fully decentralized FL approaches [112] can provide
decentralized optimization and stochastic gradient tracking
by using the cooperation of hospitals with a decentralized
stochastic gradient algorithm to accelerate the convergence
rate. Moreover, based on [119], personalized FL is necessary
for mitigating data heterogeneities in distributed health IoT
networks while attaining high-quality personalized models.
FL also allows each IoT device to choose offloading of
its computationally intensive tasks to edge gateways which
execute the learning models before sending the updates to the
cloud for combination. This realizes a cooperative network of
cloud, edge, and IoT devices for healthcare applications with
the help of differential privacy and homomorphic encryption
techniques for security improvement.
2) FL for Smart Transportation: Recently, FL has been introduced to bring AI functions to the network edge to empower
smart transportation, involving a number of participants, such
as vehicles, to collaboratively train globally shared AI models
without the need for long data transmission and compromising
user privacy. Several possible applications of FL in smart
transportation can be vehicular traffic planning and vehicular

28

resource management. In fact, FL can be used to replace
traditional centralized ML approaches in traffic prediction
tasks [10], [26] by running ML models directly at the edge
devices, e.g., vehicles, based on their datasets such as road
geometry, traffic flow and weather. The use of massive data
from multiple vehicles and huge computation capability of all
participant helps provide better traffic prediction outcomes,
which cannot be met by using centralized ML techniques with
less dataset and limited computation. Moreover, by combining
with blockchain, FL is useful to build decentralized traffic
planning solutions for vehicular systems [27]. In this regard,
each vehicle acts as an FL client to run an ML model and
exchange computed updates together via a blockchain ledger
while verifying their corresponding rewards. Further, FL has
the potential to facilitate resource management strategies for
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) networks [134]. FL along with advanced AI techniques such as DRL [136] is promising to
build federated intelligent resource allocation strategies, in
order to maximize the sum capacity of vehicular users with
respect to latency and reliability conditions. Vehicles as DRL
agents can collaborate to run distributed DNN algorithms for
optimal mode selection and resource allocation, while the BS
aggregates the updates offloaded from users to build undirected
graphs using channel gain information.
3) FL for UAVs: In UAV networks, due to the high mobility
and high altitude of UAVs, it is challenging to ensure the
continuous communications between UAVs and BSs with
respect to dynamic aerial environmental conditions to perform intelligent UAV tasks. The use of centralized AI/ML
approaches in such scenarios may not be an ideal solution,
especially when having to transmit a large amount of data over
the aerial links. FL can provide better learning solutions for
intelligent UAVs networks by using a cooperation of multiple
UAVs without transferring raw data to BSs and compromising
data privacy [141]. The use of FL would mitigate the data
volume transferred over the aerial environment and thus reduce
communication delays and privacy concerns, while increasing
training speed of the global model due to the employment of
computing resources of all UAVs. Moreover, FL enables UAVs
to collaboratively train AI models only by using their partial
illumination data [145], which potentially reduces transmission
power and improves privacy. In this way, UAVs have more
flexible solutions to adjust its serving position and user association for communication power savings. FL also makes federated UAV management much more flexible and with privacy
awareness [147]. Each UAV acts as an FL client to monitor
the air quality index in its coverage area without revealing
raw data by cooperating UAVs with a central server which is
responsible for running a light-weight DenseMobileNet model
based on haze features offloaded from distributed UAVs. For
security protection in UAV networks, FL is combined with
reinforcement learning to implement defense strategies against
jamming attack [150], by cooperating learning updates from
FL models at UAVs with a Q-learning table to determine
optimal UAV paths for minimal security risks.
4) FL for Smart City: To realize smart cities, AI/ML
techniques have been widely adopted to provide intelligence
properties thanks to their ability to handle real-time big data

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

generated from sensors, devices, and human activities [152].
However, most proposed AI-based smart city solutions rely
on a centralized learning architecture on a data center, such
as a cloud server, which is obviously not scalable to the
rapid expansion of smart devices in smart cities. FL offers
more attractive features for enabling decentralized smart city
applications with high privacy levels and low communication delays [48]. FL is also important for structuring data
streams from ubiquitous IoT devices that act as FL clients
for performing local learning without sharing their data with
external third-parties [153]. This would reshape the current
forms of smart cities by providing new services such as smart
urban communication, social economy sharing, social activity
monitoring, and interconnection of global citizens. Moreover,
we also realize that FL can enable intelligent solutions for
smart grid, a critical component of smart city ecosystems, by
offering management and energy transmission solutions in a
decentralized manner with privacy improvement [157].
5) FL for Smart Industry: FL can also provide viable
solutions to realize intelligence for industrial smart systems
with many applied domains such as robotics and Industry
4.0 without data exchange and privacy leakage. Following
[162], FL is an attractive approach to coordinate the data
learning among robotics for industrial tasks, e.g., traffic routing, without unpredictable network transmission delays. Edge
computing is also integrated with FL to realize a collaborative
learning among robotic arm devices [166]. Due to the complexity and dynamics, each device runs a separate ML model,
e.g, reinforcement learning, for determining its own control
policy, and then shares mature policy model parameters to a
cloud server for aggregation. FL also plays an important role in
supporting distributed intelligent industrial applications in Industry 4.0 [169]. Particularly, decentralized FL in Industry 4.0
can be realized by combining with the blockchain technology
which can provide high degrees of security with immutable
ledgers and smart contracts that can provide authentication
for learning interactions in FL implementation [171]. Furthermore, to enable intelligent and privacy-enhanced edgebased industrial IoT applications, many efficient FL solutions
have been introduced to solve communication issues by using
update reconstruction techniques [174], [175] or relevance
detection during the model update [177]. Network resource
management is another critical issue in industrial FL-IoT
system design that has been solved via resource allocation
[178] and stochastic training optimization [180].

VI. R ESEARCH C HALLENGES AND D IRECTIONS
As discussed in the above sections, FL demonstrates its
increasingly significant role in empowering IoT services and
applications. Despite its great potential, the extensive survey
also reveals several critical research challenges to be considered for future FL-IoT system implementation. We here
analyze several key challenges, concerning FL such as threats,
performance issues, resource management, and heterogeneity
issues in IoT networks. Several possible research directions
for these challenges are also discussed.

29

A. Security and Privacy Issues in FL
Although FL can provide privacy protection for distributed
IoT systems where the sharing of raw IoT data is not required
in the learning process, FL still remains several security and
privacy vulnerabilities from both learning clients and server
sides [186]. For example, at the client side, an adversary can
modify data features or inject an incorrect subset of data in the
original dataset to embed backdoors into the model, aiming to
adjust the training objective of local clients. This is also called
as backdoor poisoning attacks which also poison local model
updates at the clients before offloading to the server [187].
Meanwhile, the central server may contaminate the aggregated
local updates and deploy attackers to steal the training data
from gradients in a few iterations [188] because the fact that
the gradients of the weights are the inner products of the
error of learning layers and features. Consequently, the global
updating can reveal extra information about personal features
of local training data which thus poses user privacy at risks.
This issue becomes more critical in the IoT networks where
user information such as user preference, home addresses
must be preserved in applied intelligent domains with FL.
Without a protection mechanism, FL becomes a security and
privacy bottleneck in intelligent IoT systems and thus makes it
challenging to attract users in the collaborative data training.
Under these contexts, developing innovative solutions to
cope with threat challenges is of paramount importance for
safe FL systems. Perturbation techniques [188] such as differential privacy or dummy can be used to protect training
datasets against data breach, by constructing composition theorems with complex mathematical solutions. As an example,
differential privacy is applied in [189] by inserting artificial
noise (e.g., Gaussian noise) to the gradients of neural network
layers to preserve training data and hidden personal information against external threats while the convergence property
is guaranteed. This solution would ensure that the server or
malicious users cannot learn much additional information of
user samples from the received messages under any auxiliary
information and attack. Similarly, an anonymous and privacypreserving FL scheme is introduced in [190] for the mining
of industrial big data. To mitigate privacy leakage, fewer
parameters are shared between the server and each participant
while having less impact on the model accuracy. Differential
privacy is then applied on shared parameters with a Gaussian
mechanism to provide strict privacy preservation on a proxy
server as the middle layer between the server and all the
participants. Moreover, the study in [191] proposes a secure
aggregation scheme for safe FL systems, in order to provide
the strongest possible security with respect server-mediated,
unauthenticated network conditions. The core idea is to use a
double-masking structure that can protect clients by encrypting
local updates and key sharing among users and the server for
achieving fair data verification and key agreement during the
aggregation. The further privacy protection in FL-IoT is still
an ongoing research topic, and new innovative solutions and
techniques are desired to improve privacy for FL-based IoT
systems from both client (e.g., IoT device) and communication
(e.g., over the wireless server-client links) perspectives.

B. Communication and Learning Convergence Issues of FLIoT
Another challenge raised from FL-IoT implementation is its
limited performance in terms of communication and learning
convergence. In fact, communications in FL training in both
uplinks and downlinks are highly sensitive due to the unbalanced and non-IID data since each training data at each client
is different in size and distribution owing to different sensing
environments. Further, when the number of clients grows exponentially, direct communications between numerous clients
and a server for offloading updates become infeasible due
to the increasing workload on the network channels [93].
In addition to that, the convergence of FL algorithms in
IoT systems is not always ensured due to the heterogeneous
training capabilities of different IoT devices and training data
complexity. Indeed, the well-known FL algorithm FedAvg
makes limited assumption that all IoT device clients join in
each communication round for FL training [192], which is
often not feasible in realistic IoT scenarios due to device
connection loss or running out of battery. Moreover, the
convergence speed of current FL algorithms is constrained
due to the use of first-order gradient descent in loss function
minimization [193].
Several possible solutions have been proposed to solve
issues related to FL performances. The research in [194]
proposes a new efficient communication protocol that is able
to compress uplink and downlink communications while remaining high robustness to the increased number of clients,
and data distribution. These properties can be achieved by
using a combination of sparsification, ternarization, error
accumulation, and optimal Golomb encoding techniques for
uplink compression and speeding up parallel training in the
global server without compromising learning convergence.
Moreover, a new optimization algorithm is proposed in [195]
for FL-based IoT networks, called FetchSGD, that can train
high-quality models for communication efficiency. At each
communication round, clients compute a gradient based on
their local data, then compress the gradient using a data
structure called a Count Sketch before sending it to the central
aggregator. The aggregator maintains momentum and error
accumulation count sketches, and the weight update applied
at each round is extracted from the error accumulation sketch.
In this way, the proposed scheme reduces the amount of
communication required each round, while still conforming
to the training quality requirements of the federated setting.
To improve the convergence rate of FL algorithms, a new
FL design called Momentum federated learning is presented
in [196]. A momentum gradient descent (MGD) approach is
integrated at the central server to minimize the loss function
with less computation due to optimized learning parameters,
compared to traditional FL algorithms with first-order gradient
descent.
C. Resource Management in FL-IoT
The concept of FL-IoT mostly relies on scalable data
parallelism and on-device training at IoT devices before the
aggregation of learning parameters at a global server. To

30

achieve a synchronous update at the server, all IoT devices
need to devote their storage and computing resources for their
data training. Unfortunately, this requirement is not always
met due to the resource constraints of certain IoT devices
with weak computation capacities [197], which thus can cause
significant delays to the synchronized parameter aggregation
at the server. Moreover, training deep learning models such as
DNN directly on IoT devices may not be achieved due to the
requirement of much CPU frequency and battery for solving
training tasks, especially training with image and audio data
[198]. Compared to edge devices, resources of IoT devices are
still very limited for large AI training. Therefore, optimizing
one-device AI/ML models would be a viable solution that can
mitigate the computational burden posed on IoT devices.
To facilitate resource management in on-device FL training,
several approaches have been provided. The work in [199]
proposes a resource-aware FL architecture on mobile devices
which are used to train neural networks by taking information
of computation resource into consideration. To be clear, a soft
training technique is introduce for accelerating the training of
stragglers with weak computational capabilities. This can be
done by allowing them to train partially the model through
masking a particular number of resource-intensive neurons
during their local training stage, but being recovered in the
parameter aggregation stage without compromising the overall
model convergence. For optimized on-device AI models, an
improved DNN architecture called DeepRebirth is designed
in [200] for mobile AI training. Particularly, a streamlined
slimming model is integrated with the consecutive non-tensor
and tensor layer which has the potential to speed up the
training and model execution and thus can mitigate running
time and save memory resources. Simulations also confirm
a high training performance with 3x training speed and 2.5x
memory saving while only 0.4% performance drop on top5 accuracy is observed via the ImageNet validation dataset.
Another possible solution for resource management in FL is
[201] where data-importance and compute communicationaware resource management algorithms are proposed to optimize training accuracy, fairness and convergence time. The
attention is focused on the resource management problem of
sampling clients in each round taking into account communication, compute and statistical heterogeneity with the goal of
reducing convergence time. To be clear, importance sampling
and rank ordering based algorithms were developed that allow
prioritization of clients based on their resources in the presence
of non-I.I.D data across clients. Performance evaluation on
a supervised image classification task on benchmark datasets
showed significant reduction in the overall training time without loss of performance in the model training.
D. Feasibility of Deploying AI Learning Functions on IoT
Sensors
Another possible challenge is the feasibility of running AI
functions on IoT sensors. Due to the constraints of hardware,
memory, and power resources, certain IoT sensors cannot
join to train a full-size AI model [202]. In fact, advanced
ML algorithms often takes a large amount of memory and

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

power for model training and the storage of model parameters
and training variables. For example, training relatively simple
image classification models such as ResNet-50 still requires a
number of CPU cycles and megabytes of memory space [203].
Moreover, the high communication cost caused by AI training
is also a crucial bottleneck of on-device FL implementation.
Indeed, the model exchange between IoT sensors and the
server incurs communication overhead which scales up with
the model size [204]. This would discourage IoT sensors from
participating in training large models for running on-device
FL algorithms. In addition to that, how to address the energy
consumption issue in FL-IoT systems, especially in the lightweight mobile devices with less battery sources is another
critical challenge. In this context, it is important to achieve
effective and efficient local training on local devices for energy
savings while the training quality should be ensured.
Several possible solutions should be considered to facilitate
on-device AI learning for FL-IoT systems. One direction is
to improve AI hardware usage on IoT sensors. The work in
[205] introduces a software-based deep learning accelerator to
support AI/DL training on mobile hardware. The key idea is
to use a set of heterogeneous processors (e.g., GPUs) where
each computing unit exploits distinct computational resources
for processing different inference phases of DL models. This
aims to optimize hardware usage for data training without
compromising performance accuracy, enabled by the control
of two algorithms, i.e., runtime layer compression and deep
architecture decomposition. Simulation results demonstrates
its superior performance in terms of low execution time and
energy consumption in AI hardware running, compared to
cloud offloading-based approaches. This research is promising
and likely to enable developing sensor processing and mobile
AI inference, which would enable on-device FL implementation at scale. Additionally, a scheme called Tiny-TransferLearning (TinyTL) is proposed in [206] for memory-efficient
on-device sensor learning. TinyTL freezes the weights while
learning only the bias modules, thus there is no need to
store the intermediate activations which reduces the memory
footprint. To compensate for the capacity loss, a memoryefficient bias module is integrated which improves the model
capacity by refining the intermediate feature maps of the
feature extractor with a small memory overhead. Through
simulations on image classification datasets, this approach
can achieve the same level accuracy compared to fine-tuning
the full Inception-V3 while reducing the training memory
footprint by a factor of up to 12.9, which has the potential to
allow for on-device AI implementation, including FL settings
on IoT sensor devices. In terms of communication cost in ondevice FL training, the authors in [207] propose a light-weight
model training strategy, by using a concept of model output
exchange instead of model parameter exchange. Such that,
only model outputs are exchanged between IoT devices and the
server, which potentially solves communication latency issues
caused by the increase of model size. This new method can
achieve a significant latency reduction up to 99% compared
to existing FL algorithms, for the similar training accuracy
performance under non-IID data distributions. Moreover, to
solve the energy consumption issue in FL-IoT systems, a num-

31

ber of advanced techniques are integrated, including gradient
sparsification, gradient quantization, weight quantization, and
dynamic batch sizes in the FL training procedure to mitigate
energy costs for 5G mobile devices [208]. A trade-off analysis
is also provided which gives insights into how to balance the
energy consumption for local computing for model training
and wireless communications for model exchange, aiming to
boost the overall energy efficiency.

E. Standard Specifications
The introduction of vertical FL-IoT use cases in future
intelligent networks imposes major architectural changes to
current mobile networks in order to simultaneously support
a diverse variety of stringent requirements (e.g. autonomous
driving, e-healthcare, etc.) In such a context, network standards
and elements play an important role in deploying FL-IoT
ecosystems at large-scale due to the reliance of other important
computing services such as edge/cloud analytics server and
edge-IoT communication protocols. Such elements have the
power to fill the gaps in the FL-IoT ecosystem to make it
sharper and technologically visible. For example, the Industry
Specification Group (ISG) of the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) has released an initiative
called ETSI Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) [209],
which aims to leverage seamless and open edge computing
and communication frameworks for integrating various edge
computing-based applications originating from the vendors,
developers and third-party service providers. All authentic
operators can run their specific network domains at the edge of
deployed MEC. This initiative could be a significant element
to the FL-IoT systems where FL aggregation can be done
by the support of computing services offered by MEC. IoT
data training can also be stored and processed off-line at
the edge nodes which will also facilitate services like video
analytics, augmented reality, data caching, and content delivery. Moreover, to enable FL-IoT services and applications,
standards for edge-IoT communication protocols are essential.
For example, OPC-UA has been applied widely for edgeIoT scenarios [210]. This Open Platform Communication
standard is designed to support the platform independent
Unified Architecture for edge-IoT services. Another protocol is MODBUS which is the communication standard for
connecting industrial electronic equipment. MODBUS comes
with a variety of protocols such as remote terminal unit
(RTU), TCP/IP, UDP, Plus, Pemex and Enron. It relies on
a mesh networking architecture and is able to communicate
with the supervisory control and data acquisition systems
over the industrial, scientific and medical radio bands. Among
wireless protocols, Wi-Fi is one of the most prevalent IoT
communication protocols, allowing for connections between
IoT devices and computing servers such as edge nodes in
FL-IoT systems. Very recently, the IEEE 802.11 working
group has initiated discussions on releasing the next generation
of Wi-Fi standard, referred to as IEEE 802.11be Extremely
High Throughput [211], which can meet the peak throughput
requirements set by upcoming IoT applications in the 5G/6G

era. These standards are expected to support service providers
in deploying intelligent IoT services at the network edge with
FL-IoT components and devices. In summary, the research
challenges and directions are highlighted in Table VII.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
FL is an emerging distributed AI approach that has sparked
great interest to realize privacy-enhancing and scalable IoT
services and applications. In this article, we have explored the
opportunities brought by FL to facilitate IoT networks through
a state-of-the-art survey and extensive discussions based on the
emerging studies in the field. This work is motivated by the
lack of a comprehensive survey on the use of FL in IoT. To
bridge this gap, we have first introduced the recent advances
in FL and IoT and provided insights into their integration.
We have then provided an updated survey on the application
of FL in key IoT services, namely IoT data sharing, data
offloading and caching, attack detection, localization, mobile
crowdsensing, and IoT privacy and security. Subsequently, we
have paid an attention to the discussion of latest developments
of the integrated FL-IoT applications in various significant usecase domains, including smart healthcare, smart transportation,
UAVs, smart city, and smart industry. From the extensive survey, several main lessons learned have been also summarized
and analyzed. Finally, we have identified a few key research
challenges and possible directions for further investigation. We
believe that this article will stimulate more attention in this
emerging area, and encourages more research efforts toward
the full realization of FL-IoT.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “A Survey
on Internet of Things: Architecture, Enabling Technologies, Security
and Privacy, and Applications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4,
no. 5, pp. 1125–1142, Oct. 2017.
[2] M. Mohammadi and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Enabling Cognitive Smart Cities
Using Big Data and Machine Learning: Approaches and Challenges,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 94–101, Feb. 2018.
[3] Y. Sun, M. Peng, Y. Zhou, Y. Huang, and S. Mao, “Application of
Machine Learning in Wireless Networks: Key Techniques and Open
Issues,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp.
3072–3108, 2019.
[4] “Cisco Global Cloud Index: Forecast and Methodology, 2016-2021
White Paper,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/
us/solutions/executive-perspectives/annual-internet-report/index.html
[5] J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. Sa Silva, “Security for the Internet of
Things: A Survey of Existing Protocols and Open Research Issues,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1294–
1312, 2015.
[6] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtárik, A. T. Suresh, and
D. Bacon, “Federated Learning: Strategies for Improving Communication Efficiency,” arXiv:1610.05492, Oct. 2017.
[7] M. Goddard, “The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR):
European Regulation that has a Global Impact,” International Journal
of Market Research, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 703–705, Nov. 2017.
[8] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. Q.-V, P. N. Pathirana, L. B. Le, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, D. Niyato, and H. V. Poor, “Federated Learning Meets
Blockchain in Edge Computing: Opportunities and Challenges,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, Apr. 2021.
[9] M. J. Sheller, G. A. Reina, B. Edwards, J. Martin, and S. Bakas, “Multiinstitutional Deep Learning Modeling Without Sharing Patient Data:
A Feasibility Study on Brain Tumor Segmentation,” in Brainlesion:
Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, A. Crimi, S. Bakas, H. Kuijf,
F. Keyvan, M. Reyes, and T. van Walsum, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pp. 92–104.

32

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

TABLE VII: Summary of research challenges and possible directions for FL-IoT.
Challenges

Description
•

Privacy and Security
Issues in FL

•

•

Communication and
Learning Convergence
Issues in FL-IoT

•

Possible directions

At the client side, an adversary can modify data features
or inject an incorrect subset of data into the original
dataset to embed backdoors into the model [187].
The central server can contaminate the aggregated local
updates and deploy attackers to steal the training data
from gradients in a few iterations [188].

•

Communication in FL training is highly sensitive due
to non-IID data distribution and increasing numbers of
clients in distributed settings [93].
The convergence rate of traditional FL algorithms is
limited due to the issues of heterogeneous data and
resources of distributed IoT devices [192].

•

•

•

•

Resource Management
in FL

•

•

Deploying AI Functions
on IoT Sensors

•

Resource requirements for FL training are not always
met due to weak computation capabilities at certain IoT
devices [197].
Training deep learning models directly on IoT devices
may not be achieved due to limitations in CPU frequency and battery capacity [198].

•

Due to constraints on hardware, memory, and power
resources, certain IoT sensors cannot join to train a fullsize AI model [202].
The high communication cost and energy consumption
caused by AI training places limits on on-device FL
implementation [204].

•

•

•

•

Standard Specifications
in FL-IoT

•

The introduction of vertical FL-IoT use cases in future intelligent networks imposes major architectural
changes to current mobile networks to simultaneously
support a diverse variety of stringent requirements.
Network standards and elements play an important role
in deploying FL-IoT ecosystems at large-scale due to
the reliance of other important computing services such
as edge/cloud analytics server and edge-IoT communication protocols.

[10] Y. Liu, J. J. Q. Yu, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and S. Zhang, “PrivacyPreserving Traffic Flow Prediction: A Federated Learning Approach,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7751–7763, Aug.
2020.
[11] Q. Li, Z. Wen, Z. Wu, S. Hu, N. Wang, and B. He, “A Survey on
Federated Learning Systems: Vision, Hype and Reality for Data Privacy
and Protection,” arXiv:1907.09693, Apr. 2020.
[12] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
Concept and applications,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology (TIST), vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
[13] J. Park, S. Samarakoon, A. Elgabli, J. Kim, M. Bennis, S.-L. Kim,
and M. Debbah, “Communication-Efficient and Distributed Learning
Over Wireless Networks: Principles and Applications,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2008.02608, 2020.
[14] M. Aledhari, R. Razzak, R. M. Parizi, and F. Saeed, “Federated Learning: A Survey on Enabling Technologies, Protocols, and Applications,”
IEEE Access, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[15] S. K. Lo, Q. Lu, C. Wang, H. Paik, and L. Zhu, “A Systematic
Literature Review on Federated Machine Learning: From A Software

•

•

Differential privacy is applied in [189], [190] by adding
artificial noise (e.g., Gaussian noise) to learning gradients to preserve training data and hidden personal
information against external threats.
A secure aggregation scheme is proposed in [191] for
safe FL systems, in order to provide the strongest
possible security for data aggregation.
A new protocol is proposed in [194] for fast uplink
and downlink communications with increasing numbers of clients and non-IID data. Also, an algorithm
called FetchSGD is proposed in [195] for FL-based
IoT networks that can train high-quality models for
communication efficiency.
A Momentum FL scheme is designed in [196] to minimize the loss function and improve the convergence
rate with less computation.
A resource-aware FL architecture is proposed in [199]
to train neural networks with computation resource
awareness.
An improved DNN architecture is designed in [200]
for optimized mobile AI model training. Moreover,
communication-aware resource management algorithms
are proposed in [201] to optimize training accuracy,
fairness and convergence time.
A software-based deep learning accelerator is introduced in [205] to optimize hardware usage for AI/DL
training on mobile hardware. A memory-efficient ondevice sensor learning solution is also introduced [206]
which can achieve high on-device training accuracy
with less memory overhead.
Energy-aware model training strategies are important
for mitigating significant network latency [207] and
optimizing energy costs in FL-based mobile devices
[208].
The initiative called ETSI Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) has been released [209] which leverages
seamless and open edge computing and communication
frameworks for integrating various MEC-based applications from the vendors and service providers.
The IEEE 802.11 working group has initiated discussions on releasing the next generation of Wi-Fi standards, referred to as IEEE 802.11be Extremely High
Throughput [211], which can meet the peak throughput
requirements set by future IoT applications.

Engineering Perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.11354, 2020.
[16] Z. Li, V. Sharma, and S. P. Mohanty, “Preserving Data Privacy
via Federated Learning: Challenges and Solutions,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 8–16, May 2020.
[17] W. Y. B. Lim, N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, Y. Jiao, Y.-C. Liang,
Q. Yang, D. Niyato, and C. Miao, “Federated Learning in Mobile Edge
Networks: A Comprehensive Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[18] Z. Zhao, C. Feng, H. H. Yang, and X. Luo, “Federated-LearningEnabled Intelligent Fog Radio Access Networks: Fundamental Theory,
Key Techniques, and Future Trends,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 22–28, Apr. 2020.
[19] S. Niknam, H. S. Dhillon, and J. H. Reed, “Federated Learning for
Wireless Communications: Motivation, Opportunities, and Challenges,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 46–51, Jun. 2020.
[20] Y. Liu, X. Yuan, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Wang, and D. Niyato,
“Federated Learning for 6G Communications: Challenges, Methods,
and Future Directions,” arXiv:2006.02931, Jul. 2020.
[21] C. Briggs, Z. Fan, and P. Andras, “A Review of Privacy Preserving

33

Federated Learning for Private IoT Analytics,” arXiv:2004.11794, Apr.
2020.
[22] J. Xu and F. Wang, “Federated Learning for Healthcare Informatics,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.06270, 2019.
[23] Z. Du, C. Wu, T. Yoshinaga, K.-L. A. Yau, Y. Ji, and J. Li, “Federated
Learning for Vehicular Internet of Things: Recent Advances and Open
Issues,” IEEE Open Journal of the Computer Society, vol. 1, pp. 45–61,
2020.
[24] B. Brik, A. Ksentini, and M. Bouaziz, “Federated Learning for UAVsEnabled Wireless Networks: Use Cases, Challenges, and Open Problems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 53 841–53 849, 2020.
[25] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y.
Arcas, “Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from
Decentralized Data,” in Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Apr. 2017,
pp. 1273–1282.
[26] W. Y. B. Lim, J. Huang, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, D. Niyato, X.-S.
Hua, C. Leung, and C. Miao, “Towards Federated Learning in UAVEnabled Internet of Vehicles: A Multi-Dimensional Contract-Matching
Approach,” Apr. 2020, arXiv: 2004.03877.
[27] S. R. Pokhrel and J. Choi, “Federated Learning with Blockchain
for Autonomous Vehicles: Analysis and Design Challenges,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[28] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, and P. Richtárik, “Federated
Optimization: Distributed Machine Learning for On-Device Intelligence,” arXiv:1610.02527, Oct. 2016.
[29] M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, C. Yin, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “A Joint
Learning and Communications Framework for Federated Learning over
Wireless Networks,” arXiv:1909.07972, Jun. 2020.
[30] D. Leroy, A. Coucke, T. Lavril, T. Gisselbrecht, and J. Dureau,
“Federated Learning for Keyword Spotting,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), Brighton, United Kingdom, May 2019, pp. 6341–6345.
[31] S. Feng and H. Yu, “Multi-Participant Multi-Class Vertical Federated
Learning,” arXiv:2001.11154, Jan. 2020.
[32] Y. Liu, Y. Kang, C. Xing, T. Chen, and Q. Yang, “Secure Federated
Transfer Learning,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, pp. 1–1, 2020, arXiv:
1812.03337.
[33] S. Sharma, C. Xing, Y. Liu, and Y. Kang, “Secure and Efficient
Federated Transfer Learning,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Los Angeles, CA, USA, Dec.
2019, pp. 2569–2576.
[34] A. Reisizadeh, A. Mokhtari, H. Hassani, A. Jadbabaie, and
R. Pedarsani, “FedPAQ: A communication-efficient federated learning
method with periodic averaging and quantization,” in International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020, pp. 2021–
2031.
[35] J. Luo, X. Wu, Y. Luo, A. Huang, Y. Huang, Y. Liu, and Q. Yang,
“Real-World Image Datasets for Federated Learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.11089, 2019.
[36] S. Savazzi, M. Nicoli, and V. Rampa, “Federated Learning With Cooperating Devices: A Consensus Approach for Massive IoT Networks,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 4641–4654, 2020.
[37] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “Integration of Blockchain and Cloud of Things: Architecture, Applications
and Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 1–1,
2020.
[38] H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S.-L. Kim, “Blockchained On-Device
Federated Learning,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24, no. 6, pp.
1279–1283, 2019.
[39] M. Mohammadi, A. Al-Fuqaha, S. Sorour, and M. Guizani, “Deep
Learning for IoT Big Data and Streaming Analytics: A Survey,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2923–2960,
2018.
[40] D. C. Nguyen, P. Cheng, M. Ding, D. Lopez-Perez, P. N. Pathirana,
J. Li, A. Seneviratne, Y. Li, and H. V. Poor, “Enabling AI in Future
Wireless Networks: A Data Life Cycle Perspective,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 1–1, Sep. 2020.
[41] Y. Kim, P. Wang, and L. Mihaylova, “Structural Recurrent Neural Network for Traffic Speed Prediction,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2019, pp. 5207–5211.
[42] O. Bin Tariq, M. T. Lazarescu, J. Iqbal, and L. Lavagno, “Performance
of Machine Learning Classifiers for Indoor Person Localization With
Capacitive Sensors,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 12 913–12 926, 2017.
[43] Z. Shi, J. A. Zhang, R. Xu, and G. Fang, “Human Activity Recognition Using Deep Learning Networks with Enhanced Channel State

Information,” in 2018 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[44] U. Mohammad, S. Sorour, and M. Hefeida, “Task Allocation for Mobile
Federated and Offloaded Learning with Energy and Delay Constraints,”
in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops
(ICC Workshops). Dublin, Ireland: IEEE, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[45] Y. Song, T. Liu, T. Wei, X. Wang, Z. Tao, and M. Chen, “FDA3:
Federated Defense Against Adversarial Attacks for Cloud-Based IIoT
Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1,
2020.
[46] W. Li, C. Zhang, and Y. Tanaka, “Pseudo Label-driven Federated
Learning based Decentralized Indoor Localization via Mobile Crowdsourcing,” IEEE Sensors Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[47] N. Rieke, J. Hancox, W. Li, F. Milletari, H. Roth, S. Albarqouni,
S. Bakas, M. N. Galtier, B. Landman, K. Maier-Hein, S. Ourselin,
M. Sheller, R. M. Summers, A. Trask, D. Xu, M. Baust, and M. J.
Cardoso, “The Future of Digital Health with Federated Learning,”
arXiv:2003.08119, Mar. 2020.
[48] A. Albaseer, B. S. Ciftler, M. Abdallah, and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Exploiting
Unlabeled Data in Smart Cities using Federated Edge Learning,” in
2020 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
(IWCMC), Limassol, Cyprus, Jun. 2020, pp. 1666–1671.
[49] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain and
Federated Learning for Privacy-Preserved Data Sharing in Industrial
IoT,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp.
4177–4186, Jun. 2020.
[50] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne,
“Blockchain for 5G and Beyond Networks: A State of the Art Survey,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 166, p. 102693,
Sep. 2020.
[51] L. Kong, X.-Y. Liu, H. Sheng, P. Zeng, and G. Chen, “Federated Tensor
Mining for Secure Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 2144–2153, Mar. 2020.
[52] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
Empowered Asynchronous Federated Learning for Secure Data Sharing
in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311, Apr. 2020.
[53] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Differentially
private asynchronous federated learning for mobile edge computing
in urban informatics,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 2134–2143, 2019.
[54] H. Chai, S. Leng, Y. Chen, and K. Zhang, “A Hierarchical BlockchainEnabled Federated Learning Algorithm for Knowledge Sharing in
Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[55] T.-C. Chiu, Y.-Y. Shih, A.-C. Pang, C.-S. Wang, W. Weng, and C.-T.
Chou, “Semi-Supervised Distributed Learning with Non-IID Data for
AIoT Service Platform,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1,
2020.
[56] Z. Zhou, S. Yang, L. J. Pu, and S. Yu, “CEFL: Online Admission
Control, Data Scheduling and Accuracy Tuning for Cost-Efficient
Federated Learning Across Edge Nodes,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[57] S. Duan, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Li, and Y. Zhang, “JointRec: A DeepLearning-Based Joint Cloud Video Recommendation Framework for
Mobile IoT,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1655–
1666, Mar. 2020.
[58] B. Yin, H. Yin, Y. Wu, and Z. Jiang, “FDC: A Secure Federated Deep
Learning Mechanism for Data Collaborations in the Internet of Things,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6348–6359, Jul.
2020.
[59] J. Ren, H. Wang, T. Hou, S. Zheng, and C. Tang, “Federated LearningBased Computation Offloading Optimization in Edge ComputingSupported Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 69 194–69 201,
2019.
[60] T. Tuor, S. Wang, T. Salonidis, B. J. Ko, and K. K. Leung, “Demo abstract: Distributed Machine Learning at Resource-limited Edge Nodes,”
in Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2018, pp. 1–2.
[61] S. Wang, M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Federated Learning for
Energy-Efficient Task Computing in Wireless Networks,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Communications (ICC),
Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[62] Y. Deng, T. Han, and N. Ansari, “FedVision: Federated Video Analytics
With Edge Computing,” IEEE Open Journal of the Computer Society,
vol. 1, pp. 62–72, 2020.

34

[63] J. Cao, K. Zhang, F. Wu, and S. Leng, “Learning Cooperation Schemes
for Mobile Edge Computing Empowered Internet of Vehicles,” in 2020
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
Seoul, Korea (South), May 2020, pp. 1–6.
[64] Y. Tu, Y. Ruan, S. Wagle, C. G. Brinton, and C. Joe-Wong, “NetworkAware Optimization of Distributed Learning for Fog Computing,” in
Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Communications, Toronto,
ON, Canada, Jul. 2020, pp. 2509–2518.
[65] S. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Yang, and W. Wang,
“A Survey on Mobile Edge Networks: Convergence of Computing,
Caching and Communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 6757–6779,
2017.
[66] Z. Yu, J. Hu, G. Min, H. Lu, Z. Zhao, H. Wang, and N. Georgalas, “Federated Learning Based Proactive Content Caching in Edge Computing,”
in 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM),
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[67] X. Wang, Y. Han, C. Wang, Q. Zhao, X. Chen, and M. Chen,
“In-Edge AI: Intelligentizing Mobile Edge Computing, Caching and
Communication by Federated Learning,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 5,
pp. 156–165, Sep. 2019.
[68] X. Wang, C. Wang, X. Li, V. C. M. Leung, and T. Taleb, “Federated
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Internet of Things with Decentralized Cooperative Edge Caching,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp.
1–1, 2020.
[69] Z. M. Fadlullah and N. Kato, “HCP: Heterogeneous Computing Platform for Federated Learning Based Collaborative Content Caching
Towards 6G Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in
Computing, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[70] L. Cui, X. Su, Z. Ming, Z. Chen, S. Yang, Y. Zhou, and W. Xiao,
“CREAT: Blockchain-assisted Compression Algorithm of Federated
Learning for Content Caching in Edge Computing,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[71] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne,
“Blockchain for Secure EHRs Sharing of Mobile Cloud Based E-Health
Systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 66 792–66 806, 2019.
[72] K. Qi and C. Yang, “Popularity Prediction with Federated Learning
for Proactive Caching at Wireless Edge,” in 2020 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Seoul, Korea
(South), May 2020, pp. 1–6.
[73] Y. Wu, Y. Jiang, M. Bennis, F. Zheng, X. Gao, and X. You, “Content
Popularity Prediction in Fog Radio Access Networks: A Federated
Learning Based Approach,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[74] H. Wang, K. Sreenivasan, S. Rajput, H. Vishwakarma, S. Agarwal,
J.-y. Sohn, K. Lee, and D. Papailiopoulos, “Attack of the Tails: Yes,
You Really Can Backdoor Federated Learning,” arXiv:2007.05084, Jul.
2020.
[75] S. Wang and Z. Qiao, “Robust Pervasive Detection for Adversarial
Samples of Artificial Intelligence in IoT Environments,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 88 693–88 704, 2019.
[76] Y. Fraboni, R. Vidal, and M. Lorenzi, “Free-rider Attacks on Model
Aggregation in Federated Learning,” arXiv:2006.11901, Jun. 2020.
[77] S. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Wang, Y. Liu, and T. Chen, “Learning to Detect
Malicious Clients for Robust Federated Learning,” arXiv:2002.00211,
Feb. 2020, arXiv: 2002.00211.
[78] S. Li, Y. Cheng, Y. Liu, W. Wang, and T. Chen, “Abnormal Client
Behavior Detection in Federated Learning,” arXiv:1910.09933, Dec.
2019.
[79] L. Wang, S. Xu, X. Wang, and Q. Zhu, “Eavesdrop the Composition Proportion of Training Labels in Federated Learning,”
arXiv:1910.06044, Oct. 2019, arXiv: 1910.06044.
[80] N. Rodrı́guez-Barroso, E. Martı́nez-Cámara, M. V. Luzón, G. G. Seco,
M. n. Veganzones, and F. Herrera, “Dynamic Federated Learning
Model for Identifying Adversarial Clients,” arXiv:2007.15030, Jul.
2020.
[81] S. Rajasegarar, C. Leckie, and M. Palaniswami, “Hyperspherical Cluster based Distributed Anomaly Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 74, no. 1,
pp. 1833–1847, Jan. 2014.
[82] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan, and
A.-R. Sadeghi, “DÏoT: A Federated Self-learning Anomaly Detection
System for IoT,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), Dallas, TX, USA, Jul. 2019,
pp. 756–767.
[83] T. V. Khoa, Y. M. Saputra, D. T. Hoang, N. L. Trung, D. Nguyen, N. V.
Ha, and E. Dutkiewicz, “Collaborative Learning Model for Cyberattack

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

Detection Systems in IoT Industry 4.0,” in Proceedings of the Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Seoul, Korea
(South), May 2020, pp. 1–6.
[84] B. Cetin, A. Lazar, J. Kim, A. Sim, and K. Wu, “Federated Wireless
Network Intrusion Detection,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Big Data (Big Data), Los Angeles, CA, USA, Dec. 2019, pp. 6004–
6006.
[85] A. M. El-Semary and M. G.-H. M. Mostafa, “Distributed and Scalable
Intrusion Detection System Based on Agents and Intelligent Techniques,” Journal of Information Processing Systems, vol. 6, no. 4, pp.
481–500, Dec. 2010.
[86] R. Gâlvez, V. Moonsamy, and C. Diaz, “Less is More: A Privacyrespecting Android Malware Classifier using Federated Learning,”
arXiv:2007.08319, Jul. 2020.
[87] L. Chen, S. Thombre, K. Jarvinen, E. S. Lohan, A. Alen-Savikko,
H. Leppakoski, M. Z. H. Bhuiyan, S. Bu-Pasha, G. N. Ferrara,
S. Honkala, J. Lindqvist, L. Ruotsalainen, P. Korpisaari, and H. Kuusniemi, “Robustness, Security and Privacy in Location-Based Services
for Future IoT: A Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 8956–8977, 2017.
[88] B. S. Ciftler, A. Albaseer, N. Lasla, and M. Abdallah, “Federated
Learning for RSS Fingerprint-based Localization: A Privacy-Preserving
Crowdsourcing Method,” in 2020 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC), Limassol, Cyprus, Jun. 2020,
pp. 2112–2117.
[89] J. Torres-Sospedra, R. Montoliu, A. Martinez-Uso, J. P. Avariento, T. J.
Arnau, M. Benedito-Bordonau, and J. Huerta, “UJIIndoorLoc: A new
multi-building and multi-floor database for WLAN fingerprint-based
indoor localization problems,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN),
Busan, South Korea, Oct. 2014, pp. 261–270.
[90] Y. Liu, H. Li, J. Xiao, and H. Jin, “FLoc: Fingerprint-Based Indoor Localization System under a Federated Learning Updating Framework,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Mobile Ad-Hoc and
Sensor Networks (MSN), Shenzhen, China, Dec. 2019, pp. 113–118.
[91] F. Yin, Z. Lin, Y. Xu, Q. Kong, D. Li, S. Theodoridis, Shuguang,
and Cui, “FedLoc: Federated Learning Framework for Data-Driven
Cooperative Localization and Location Data Processing,” May 2020,
arXiv: 2003.03697.
[92] Z. Zhou, H. Liao, B. Gu, K. M. S. Huq, S. Mumtaz, and J. Rodriguez,
“Robust Mobile Crowd Sensing: When Deep Learning Meets Edge
Computing,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 54–60, Jul. 2018.
[93] K. Bonawitz, H. Eichner, W. Grieskamp, D. Huba, A. Ingerman,
V. Ivanov, C. Kiddon, J. Konečný, S. Mazzocchi, H. B. McMahan,
T. Van Overveldt, D. Petrou, D. Ramage, and J. Roselander, “Towards Federated Learning at Scale: System Design,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.01046, Feb. 2019.
[94] Y. Liu, Z. Ma, X. Liu, S. Ma, S. Nepal, and R. Deng, “Boosting
Privately: Privacy-Preserving Federated Extreme Boosting for Mobile
Crowdsensing,” arXiv:1907.10218, Apr. 2020.
[95] Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Liu, B. B. Gupta, and J. Ma, “Cloud-based
Federated Boosting for Mobile Crowdsensing,” arXiv:2005.05304, May
2020.
[96] S. R. Pandey, N. H. Tran, M. Bennis, Y. K. Tun, A. Manzoor, and
C. S. Hong, “A Crowdsourcing Framework for On-Device Federated
Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19,
no. 5, pp. 3241–3256, May 2020.
[97] W. Y. B. Lim, Z. Xiong, C. Miao, D. Niyato, Q. Yang, C. Leung, and
H. V. Poor, “Hierarchical Incentive Mechanism Design for Federated
Machine Learning in Mobile Networks,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[98] J. Lee, D. J. Kim, and D. Niyato, “Market Analysis of Distributed
Learning Resource Management for Internet of Things: A Game
Theoretic Approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[99] A. Imteaj and M. H. Amini, “Distributed Sensing Using Smart EndUser Devices: Pathway to Federated Learning for Autonomous IoT,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science
and Computational Intelligence (CSCI), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Dec.
2019, pp. 1156–1161.
[100] Y. Wang, Z. Su, N. Zhang, and A. Benslimane, “Learning in the Air:
Secure Federated Learning for UAV-Assisted Crowdsensing,” IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[101] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Federated
Learning for Data Privacy Preservation in Vehicular Cyber-Physical
Systems,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 50–56, May 2020.
[102] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, M. Yang, T. Wang, N. Wang, L. Lyu, D. Niyato, and
K.-Y. Lam, “Local Differential Privacy based Federated Learning for
Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.

35

[103] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. Jiang, R. Tan, D. Niyato, Z. Li, L. Lyu, and
Y. Liu, “Privacy-Preserving Blockchain-Based Federated Learning for
IoT Devices,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1817–
1829, Feb. 2021.
[104] Y. Zhao, J. Chen, D. Wu, J. Teng, and S. Yu, “Multi-Task Network
Anomaly Detection using Federated Learning,” in Proceedings of the
Tenth International Symposium on Information and Communication
Technology, ser. SoICT 2019.
Hanoi, Ha Long Bay, Viet Nam:
Association for Computing Machinery, Dec. 2019, pp. 273–279.
[105] S. Li, Y. Cheng, Y. Liu, W. Wang, and T. Chen, “Abnormal Client
Behavior Detection in Federated Learning,” arXiv:1910.09933 [cs,
stat], Dec. 2019, arXiv: 1910.09933.
[106] Y. Qu, L. Gao, T. H. Luan, Y. Xiang, S. Yu, B. Li, and G. Zheng,
“Decentralized Privacy Using Blockchain-Enabled Federated Learning
in Fog Computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp.
5171–5183, Jun. 2020.
[107] B. Shickel, P. J. Tighe, A. Bihorac, and P. Rashidi, “Deep EHR: A
Survey of Recent Advances in Deep Learning Techniques for Electronic Health Record (EHR) Analysis,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical
and Health Informatics, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1589–1604, Sep. 2018.
[108] G. Harerimana, B. Jang, J. W. Kim, and H. K. Park, “Health Big Data
Analytics: A Technology Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 65 661–
65 678, 2018.
[109] B. C. Drolet, J. S. Marwaha, B. Hyatt, P. E. Blazar, and S. D. Lifchez,
“Electronic Communication of Protected Health Information: Privacy,
Security, and HIPAA Compliance,” The Journal of Hand Surgery,
vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 411–416, Jun. 2017.
[110] M. Hao, H. Li, G. Xu, Z. Liu, and Z. Chen, “Privacy-aware and
Resource-saving Collaborative Learning for Healthcare in Cloud Computing,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[111] D. Liu, T. Miller, R. Sayeed, and K. D. Mandl, “FADL:FederatedAutonomous Deep Learning for Distributed Electronic Health Record,”
arXiv:1811.11400, Dec. 2018.
[112] S. Lu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and C. Mack, “Learn Electronic Health Records by Fully Decentralized Federated Learning,”
arXiv:1912.01792, Dec. 2019.
[113] O. Choudhury, A. Gkoulalas-Divanis, T. Salonidis, I. Sylla, Y. Park,
G. Hsu, and A. Das, “Differential Privacy-enabled Federated Learning for Sensitive Health Data,” arXiv:1910.02578, Feb. 2020, arXiv:
1910.02578.
[114] T. S. Brisimi, R. Chen, T. Mela, A. Olshevsky, I. C. Paschalidis, and
W. Shi, “Federated learning of predictive models from federated Electronic Health Records,” International Journal of Medical Informatics,
vol. 112, pp. 59–67, Apr. 2018.
[115] O. Choudhury, Y. Park, T. Salonidis, A. Gkoulalas-Divanis, I. Sylla,
and A. k. Das, “Predicting Adverse Drug Reactions on Distributed
Health Data using Federated Learning,” AMIA Annual Symposium
Proceedings, vol. 2019, pp. 313–322, Mar. 2020.
[116] H. Chen, H. Li, G. Xu, Y. Zhang, and X. Luo, “Achieving Privacypreserving Federated Learning with Irrelevant Updates over E-Health
Applications,” in ICC 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[117] G. A. Kaissis, M. R. Makowski, D. Rückert, and R. F. Braren, “Secure, Privacy-preserving and Federated Machine Learning in Medical
Imaging,” Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 305–311, Jun.
2020.
[118] B. Yuan, S. Ge, and W. Xing, “A Federated Learning Framework for
Healthcare IoT devices,” May 2020, arXiv: 2005.05083.
[119] Q. Wu, K. He, and X. Chen, “Personalized Federated Learning for
Intelligent IoT Applications: A Cloud-Edge Based Framework,” IEEE
Open Journal of the Computer Society, vol. 1, pp. 35–44, 2020.
[120] Y. Chen, X. Qin, J. Wang, C. Yu, and W. Gao, “FedHealth: A
Federated Transfer Learning Framework for Wearable Healthcare,”
IEEE Intelligent Systems, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[121] T. Gong, H. Huang, P. Li, K. Zhang, and H. Jiang, “A Medical
Healthcare System for Privacy Protection Based on IoT,” in 2015
Seventh International Symposium on Parallel Architectures, Algorithms
and Programming (PAAP), Nanjing, China, Dec. 2015, pp. 217–222.
[122] Y. Zhang, T. Gu, and X. Zhang, “MDLdroid: a ChainSGD-reduce
Approach to Mobile Deep Learning for Personal Mobile Sensing,”
in 2020 19th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Information
Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN), Sydney, Australia, Apr. 2020,
pp. 73–84.
[123] T.-I. Szatmari, M. K. Petersen, M. J. Korzepa, and T. Giannetsos,
“Modelling Audiological Preferences using Federated Learning,” in

Proceedings of the 28th ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization. Genoa Italy: ACM, Jul. 2020, pp. 187–190.
[124] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “BEdgeHealth: A Decentralized Architecture for Edge-based IoMT Networks
Using Blockchain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Feb. 2021.
[125] J. Passerat-Palmbach, T. Farnan, R. Miller, M. S. Gross, H. L. Flannery, and B. Gleim, “A Blockchain-orchestrated Federated Learning
Architecture for Healthcare Consortia,” arXiv:1910.12603, Oct. 2019.
[126] A. G. Roy, S. Siddiqui, S. Pölsterl, N. Navab, and C. Wachinger,
“BrainTorrent: A Peer-to-Peer Environment for Decentralized Federated Learning,” arXiv:1905.06731, May 2019.
[127] D. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, and A. Seneviratne, “Blockchain
and AI-based Solutions to Combat Coronavirus (COVID-19)-like Epidemics: A Survey,” 10.36227/techrxiv.12121962.v1, Apr. 2020.
[128] R. Kumar, A. A. Khan, S. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Abuidris, W. Amin,
and J. Kumar, “Blockchain-Federated-Learning and Deep Learning
Models for COVID-19 Detection using CT Imaging,” Jul. 2020, arXiv:
2007.06537.
[129] B. Liu, B. Yan, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Experiments of
Federated Learning for COVID-19 Chest X-ray Images,” Jul. 2020,
arXiv: 2007.05592.
[130] H. Ye, L. Liang, G. Ye Li, J. Kim, L. Lu, and M. Wu, “Machine
Learning for Vehicular Networks: Recent Advances and Application
Examples,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 13, no. 2, pp.
94–101, Jun. 2018.
[131] A. M. Elbir and S. Coleri, “Federated Learning for Vehicular Networks,” arXiv: 2006.01412, Jun. 2020.
[132] S. Jin, X. Luo, and D. Ma, “Determining the Breakpoints of Fundamental Diagrams,” IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 74–90, 2020.
[133] X. Liang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, M. Liu, and Q. Yang, “Federated Transfer
Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Driving,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.06001, 2019.
[134] S. Samarakoon, M. Bennis, W. Saad, and M. Debbah, “Federated
Learning for Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency V2V Communications,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[135] X. Zhang, M. Peng, S. Yan, and Y. Sun, “Deep-ReinforcementLearning-Based Mode Selection and Resource Allocation for Cellular
V2X Communications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 7,
pp. 6380–6391, Jul. 2020.
[136] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “PrivacyPreserved Task Offloading in Mobile Blockchain with Deep Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
Management, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[137] D. Conway-Jones, T. Tuor, S. Wang, and K. K. Leung, “Demonstration
of Federated Learning in a Resource-Constrained Networked Environment,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Smart
Computing (SMARTCOMP), Washington, DC, USA, Jun. 2019, pp.
484–486.
[138] K. Xiong, S. Leng, C. Huang, C. Yuen, and L. Guan, “Intelligent Task Offloading for Heterogeneous V2X Communications,”
arXiv:2006.15855, Jun. 2020.
[139] A. Fotouhi, H. Qiang, M. Ding, M. Hassan, L. G. Giordano, A. GarciaRodriguez, and J. Yuan, “Survey on UAV Cellular Communications:
Practical Aspects, Standardization Advancements, Regulation, and Security Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 3417–3442, 2019.
[140] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Liquid State Machine Learning for
Resource and Cache Management in LTE-U Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV) Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1504–1517, Mar. 2019.
[141] H. Shiri, J. Park, and M. Bennis, “Communication-Efficient Massive
UAV Online Path Control: Federated Learning Meets Mean-Field Game
Theory,” Aug. 2020, arXiv: 2003.04451.
[142] T. Zeng, O. Semiari, M. Mozaffari, M. Chen, W. Saad, and M. Bennis,
“Federated Learning in the Sky: Joint Power Allocation and Scheduling
with UAV Swarms,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[143] Y. Xiao, Y. Ye, S. Huang, L. Hao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, and S. Mumtaz,
“Fully Decentralized Federated Learning Based Beamforming Design
for UAV Communications,” Jul. 2020, arXiv: 2007.13614.
[144] W. Yuan, C. Liu, F. Liu, S. Li, and D. W. K. Ng, “Learning-based
Predictive Beamforming for UAV Communications with Jittering,”
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, pp. 1–1, 2020.

36

[145] Y. Wang, Y. Yang, and T. Luo, “Federated Convolutional Auto-Encoder
for Optimal Deployment of UAVs with Visible Light Communications,”
in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops
(ICC Workshops), Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[146] Y. Qu, C. Dong, J. Zheng, Q. Wu, Y. Shen, F. Wu, and A. Anpalagan,
“Empowering the Edge Intelligence by Air-Ground Integrated Federated Learning in 6G Networks,” arXiv:2007.13054, Jul. 2020.
[147] Y. Liu, J. Nie, X. Li, S. H. Ahmed, W. Y. B. Lim, and C. Miao,
“Federated Learning in the Sky: Aerial-Ground Air Quality Sensing
Framework with UAV Swarms,” Jul. 2020, arXiv: 2007.12004.
[148] N. I. Mowla, N. H. Tran, I. Doh, and K. Chae, “Federated LearningBased Cognitive Detection of Jamming Attack in Flying Ad-Hoc
Network,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 4338–4350, 2020.
[149] ——, “AFRL: Adaptive Federated Reinforcement Learning for Intelligent Jamming Defense in FANET,” Journal of Communications and
Networks, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 244–258, Jun. 2020.
[150] M. Chu, H. Li, X. Liao, and S. Cui, “Reinforcement Learning-Based
Multiaccess Control and Battery Prediction With Energy Harvesting
in IoT Systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
2009–2020, Apr. 2019.
[151] A. Gharaibeh, M. A. Salahuddin, S. J. Hussini, A. Khreishah, I. Khalil,
M. Guizani, and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Smart Cities: A Survey on Data Management, Security, and Enabling Technologies,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2456–2501, 2017.
[152] M. Mohammadi and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Enabling Cognitive Smart Cities
Using Big Data and Machine Learning: Approaches and Challenges,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 94–101, Feb. 2018.
[153] D. R. Mukhametov, “Ubiquitous Computing and Distributed Machine
Learning in Smart Cities,” in 2020 Wave Electronics and its Application
in Information and Telecommunication Systems (WECONF), SaintPetersburg, Russia, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–5.
[154] Y. Liu, A. Huang, Y. Luo, H. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, L. Feng,
T. Chen, H. Yu, and Q. Yang, “FedVision: An Online Visual Object
Detection Platform Powered by Federated Learning,” Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 08, pp.
13 172–13 179, Apr. 2020.
[155] A. Kumar, T. Braud, S. Tarkoma, and P. Hui, “Trustworthy AI in the
Age of Pervasive Computing and Big Data,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications
Workshops (PerCom Workshops), Austin, TX, USA, Mar. 2020, pp.
1–6.
[156] M. Masera, E. F. Bompard, F. Profumo, and N. Hadjsaid, “Smart
(Electricity) Grids for Smart Cities: Assessing Roles and Societal
Impacts,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 4, pp. 613–625, Apr.
2018.
[157] S. Perez, J. Perez, P. Arroba, R. Blanco, J. L. Ayala, and J. M. Moya,
“Predictive GPU-based ADAS Management in Energy-Conscious
Smart Cities,” in 2019 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference
(ISC2), Casablanca, Morocco, Oct. 2019, pp. 349–354.
[158] A. Taik and S. Cherkaoui, “Electrical Load Forecasting Using Edge
Computing and Federated Learning,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland, Jun.
2020, pp. 1–6.
[159] H. Cao, S. Liu, R. Zhao, and X. Xiong, “IFed: A novel federated
learning framework for local differential privacy in Power Internet of
Things,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 16,
no. 5, May 2020.
[160] Z. Ge, Z. Song, S. X. Ding, and B. Huang, “Data Mining and Analytics
in the Process Industry: The Role of Machine Learning,” IEEE Access,
vol. 5, pp. 20 590–20 616, 2017.
[161] T. Hiessl, D. Schall, J. Kemnitz, and S. Schulte, “Industrial Federated Learning – Requirements and System Design,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.06850, May 2020.
[162] W. Zhou, Y. Li, S. Chen, and B. Ding, “Real-Time Data Processing Architecture for Multi-Robots Based on Differential Federated Learning,” in 2018 IEEE SmartWorld, Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computing, Scalable Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big Data Computing, Internet of People and Smart City Innovation (SmartWorld/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI), Guangzhou, China,
Oct. 2018, pp. 462–471.
[163] B. Liu, L. Wang, M. Liu, and C.-Z. Xu, “Federated Imitation Learning:
A Novel Framework for Cloud Robotic Systems With Heterogeneous
Sensor Data,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
3509–3516, Apr. 2020.

ACCEPTED AT IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS

[164] B. Liu, L. Wang, and M. Liu, “Lifelong Federated Reinforcement
Learning: A Learning Architecture for Navigation in Cloud Robotic
Systems,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
4555–4562, Oct. 2019.
[165] A. K. Tanwani, N. Mor, J. Kubiatowicz, J. E. Gonzalez, and K. Goldberg, “A Fog Robotics Approach to Deep Robot Learning: Application
to Object Recognition and Grasp Planning in Surface Decluttering,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), Montreal, QC, Canada, May 2019, pp. 4559–4566.
[166] H.-K. Lim, J.-B. Kim, C.-M. Kim, G.-Y. Hwang, H.-b. Choi, and Y.H. Han, “Federated Reinforcement Learning for Controlling Multiple
Rotary Inverted Pendulums in Edge Computing Environments,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
in Information and Communication (ICAIIC), Fukuoka, Japan, Feb.
2020, pp. 463–464.
[167] Z. Li, L. Wang, L. Jiang, and C.-Z. Xu, “FC-SLAM: Federated Learning Enhanced Distributed Visual-LiDAR SLAM In Cloud Robotic
System,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics (ROBIO), Dali, China, Dec. 2019, pp. 1995–2000.
[168] Y. Lu, “Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open
research issues,” Journal of Industrial Information Integration, vol. 6,
pp. 1–10, Jun. 2017.
[169] M. Hao, H. Li, X. Luo, G. Xu, H. Yang, and S. Liu, “Efficient and
Privacy-Enhanced Federated Learning for Industrial Artificial Intelligence,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 10,
pp. 6532–6542, Oct. 2020.
[170] S. R. Pokhrel and S. Singh, “Compound-TCP Performance for Industry
4.0 WiFi: A Cognitive Federated Learning Approach,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[171] P. C. M. Arachchige, P. Bertok, I. Khalil, D. Liu, S. Camtepe, and
M. Atiquzzaman, “A Trustworthy Privacy Preserving Framework for
Machine Learning in Industrial IoT Systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 6092–6102, Sep. 2020.
[172] Y. Qu, S. R. Pokhrel, S. Garg, L. Gao, and Y. Xiang, “A Blockchained
Federated Learning Framework for Cognitive Computing in Industry
4.0 Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1,
2020.
[173] T. Qiu, J. Chi, X. Zhou, Z. Ning, M. Atiquzzaman, and D. O.
Wu, “Edge Computing in Industrial Internet of Things: Architecture,
Advances and Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2462–2488, 2020.
[174] J. Mills, J. Hu, and G. Min, “Communication-Efficient Federated
Learning for Wireless Edge Intelligence in IoT,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 5986–5994, Jul. 2020.
[175] H. Sun, S. Li, F. R. Yu, Q. Qi, J. Wang, and J. Liao, “Toward
Communication-Efficient Federated Learning in the Internet of Things
With Edge Computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 11,
pp. 11 053–11 067, Nov. 2020.
[176] S. Zhai, X. Jin, L. Wei, H. Luo, and M. Cao, “Dynamic Federated
Learning for GMEC With Time-Varying Wireless Link,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 10 400–10 412, 2021.
[177] L. Wang, W. Wang, and B. Li, “CMFL: Mitigating Communication
Overhead for Federated Learning,” in 2019 IEEE 39th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS). Dallas, TX,
USA: IEEE, Jul. 2019, pp. 954–964.
[178] T. Li, M. Sanjabi, A. Beirami, and V. Smith, “Fair Resource Allocation
in Federated Learning,” arXiv:1905.10497 [cs, stat], Feb. 2020, arXiv:
1905.10497.
[179] Z. Yang, M. Chen, W. Saad, C. S. Hong, and M. Shikh-Bahaei,
“Energy Efficient Federated Learning Over Wireless Communication
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, pp. 1–1,
2020.
[180] H. T. Nguyen, N. Cong Luong, J. Zhao, C. Yuen, and D. Niyato,
“Resource Allocation in Mobility-Aware Federated Learning Networks:
A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach,” in 2020 IEEE 6th World
Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT). New Orleans, LA, USA:
IEEE, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[181] A. Imteaj and M. H. Amini, “FedAR: Activity and Resource-Aware
Federated Learning Model for Distributed Mobile Robots,” Jan. 2021,
arXiv: 2101.03705.
[182] U. M. Aivodji, S. Gambs, and A. Martin, “IOTFLA : A Secured and
Privacy-Preserving Smart Home Architecture Implementing Federated
Learning,” in 2019 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW). San
Francisco, CA, USA: IEEE, May 2019, pp. 175–180.
[183] A. Fu, X. Zhang, N. Xiong, Y. Gao, and H. Wang, “VFL: A Verifiable
Federated Learning with Privacy-Preserving for Big Data in Industrial
IoT,” arXiv: 2007.13585, Jul. 2020.

37

[184] C. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Zheng, R. Li, and H. Liu, “FengHuoLun: A Federated Learning based Edge Computing Platform for Cyber-Physical
Systems,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), Austin, TX, USA, Mar. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[185] Y. Guo, F. Liu, Z. Cai, L. Chen, and N. Xiao, “FEEL: A Federated
Edge Learning System for Efficient and Privacy-Preserving Mobile
Healthcare,” in Proceedings of the 49th International Conference on
Parallel Processing - ICPP, Edmonton AB Canada, Aug. 2020, pp.
1–11.
[186] L. Lyu, H. Yu, and Q. Yang, “Threats to Federated Learning: A Survey,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02133, Mar. 2020.
[187] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How
To Backdoor Federated Learning,” in International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Jun. 2020, pp. 2938–2948.
[188] C. Ma, J. Li, M. Ding, H. H. Yang, F. Shu, T. Q. S. Quek, and H. V.
Poor, “On Safeguarding Privacy and Security in the Framework of
Federated Learning,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 242–248, Jul.
2020.
[189] R. Hu, Y. Guo, H. Li, Q. Pei, and Y. Gong, “Personalized Federated
Learning with Differential Privacy,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
pp. 1–1, 2020.
[190] B. Zhao, K. Fan, K. Yang, Z. Wang, H. Li, and Y. Yang, “Anonymous
and Privacy-preserving Federated Learning with Industrial Big Data,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2021.
[191] K. Bonawitz, V. Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMahan,
S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, and K. Seth, “Practical Secure Aggregation for Federated Learning on User-Held Data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.04482, Nov. 2016.
[192] A. Nilsson, S. Smith, G. Ulm, E. Gustavsson, and M. Jirstrand,
“A Performance Evaluation of Federated Learning Algorithms,” in
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Distributed Infrastructures
for Deep Learning, ser. DIDL ’18. Rennes, France: Association for
Computing Machinery, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–8.
[193] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
“Federated Optimization in Heterogeneous Networks,” Dec. 2018.
[194] F. Sattler, S. Wiedemann, K.-R. Muller, and W. Samek, “Robust and
Communication-Efficient Federated Learning From Non-i.i.d. Data,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–
14, 2019.
[195] D. Rothchild, A. Panda, E. Ullah, N. Ivkin, I. Stoica, V. Braverman, J. Gonzalez, and R. Arora, “FetchSGD: Communication-Efficient
Federated Learning with Sketching,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR, Nov. 2020, pp. 8253–8265.
[196] W. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Chen, and W. Zhang, “Accelerating Federated
Learning via Momentum Gradient Descent,” IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 1754–1766, Aug.
2020.
[197] M. Tsukada, M. Kondo, and H. Matsutani, “A Neural NetworkBased On-device Learning Anomaly Detector for Edge Devices,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[198] J. Chauhan, S. Seneviratne, Y. Hu, A. Misra, A. Seneviratne, and
Y. Lee, “Breathing-Based Authentication on Resource-Constrained IoT
Devices using Recurrent Neural Networks,” Computer, vol. 51, no. 5,
pp. 60–67, May 2018.
[199] Z. Xu, Z. Yang, J. Xiong, J. Yang, and X. Chen, “ELFISH: ResourceAware Federated Learning on Heterogeneous Edge Devices,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.01684, Dec. 2019.
[200] D. Li, X. Wang, and D. Kong, “DeepRebirth: Accelerating Deep Neural
Network Execution on Mobile Devices,” Aug. 2017.
[201] R. Balakrishnan, M. Akdeniz, S. Dhakal, and N. Himayat, “Resource
Management and Fairness for Federated Learning over Wireless Edge
Networks,” in 2020 IEEE 21st International Workshop on Signal
Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC). Atlanta,
GA, USA: IEEE, May 2020, pp. 1–5.
[202] S. Dhar, J. Guo, J. Liu, S. Tripathi, U. Kurup, and M. Shah, “On-Device
Machine Learning: An Algorithms and Learning Theory Perspective,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00623, 2019.
[203] E. Rezende, G. Ruppert, T. Carvalho, F. Ramos, and P. De Geus,
“Malicious software classification using transfer learning of ResNet-50
deep neural network,” in Proceedings of the 16th IEEE International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), 2017,
pp. 1011–1014.
[204] P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan, B. Avent, A. Bellet, M. Bennis, A. N.
Bhagoji, K. Bonawitz, Z. Charles, G. Cormode, R. Cummings et al.,
“Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.04977, 2019.
[205] N. D. Lane, S. Bhattacharya, P. Georgiev, C. Forlivesi, L. Jiao, L. Qendro, and F. Kawsar, “DeepX: A Software Accelerator for Low-Power
Deep Learning Inference on Mobile Devices,” in Proceedings of the
15th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Information Processing
in Sensor Networks (IPSN), Apr. 2016, pp. 1–12.
[206] H. Cai, C. Gan, L. Zhu, and S. Han, “TinyTL: Reduce Memory,
Not Parameters for Efficient on-device Learning,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, 2020.
[207] S. Itahara, T. Nishio, Y. Koda, M. Morikura, and K. Yamamoto, “Distillation-Based Semi-Supervised Federated Learning for
Communication-Efficient Collaborative Training with Non-IID Private
Data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06180, Aug. 2020.
[208] D. Shi, L. Li, R. Chen, P. Prakash, M. Pan, and Y. Fang, “Towards
Energy Efficient Federated Learning over 5G+ Mobile Devices,” Jan.
2021, arXiv: 2101.04866.
[209] F. Giust, X. Costa-Perez, and A. Reznik, “Multi Access Edge Computing Overview of ETSI - IEEE Future Networks,” IEEE 5G Tech Focus,
vol. 1, no. 4, p. 4, 2017.
[210] P. P. Ray, D. Dash, and D. De, “Edge computing for Internet of Things:
A survey, e-healthcare case study and future direction,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 140, pp. 1–22, Aug. 2019.
[211] D. Lopez-Perez, A. Garcia-Rodriguez, L. Galati-Giordano, M. Kasslin,
and K. Doppler, “IEEE 802.11be Extremely High Throughput: The
Next Generation of Wi-Fi Technology Beyond 802.11ax,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 113–119, Sep. 2019.

